arXiv:2006.09891v1 [cs.CL] 17 Jun 2020           Fine-grained Sentiment Controlled Text Generation

                                                                   Bidisha Samanta, Mohit Agarwal, Niloy Ganguly

                                                     bidisha@iitkgp.ac.in, mohit2agrawal@gmail.com, niloy@cse.iitkgp.ac.in
                                                                                         IIT Kharagpur

                                                                                                                Abstract
                                                     Controlled text generation techniques aim to regulate specific attributes (e.g. sentiment) while
                                                preserving the attribute independent content. The state-of-the-art approaches model the specified
                                                attribute as a structured or discrete representation while making the content representation independent
                                                of it to achieve a better control. However, disentangling the text representation into separate latent spaces
                                                overlooks complex dependencies between content and attribute, leading to generation of poorly constructed
                                                and not so meaningful sentences. Moreover, such an approach fails to provide a finer control on the degree
                                                of attribute change. To address these problems of controlled text generation, in this paper, we propose
                                                DE-VAE, a hierarchical framework which captures both information enriched entangled representation
                                                and attribute specific disentangled representation in different hierarchies. DE-VAE achieves better control
                                                of sentiment as an attribute while preserving the content by learning a suitable lossless transformation
                                                network from the disentangled sentiment space to the desired entangled representation. Through feature
                                                supervision on a single dimension of the disentangled representation, DE-VAE maps the variation of
                                                sentiment to a continuous space which helps in smoothly regulating sentiment from positive to negative
                                                and vice versa. Detailed experiments on three publicly available review datasets show the superiority of
                                                DE-VAE over recent state-of-the-art approaches.

                                        1 Introduction

                                        Text generation using variational inference [2] is beneficial as it captures important characteristics of the
                                        input word sequence in a continuous latent space. The obtained latent space text embedding is broadly
                                        used for performing several downstream tasks including machine translation [1], summarization [15], dialog
                                        generation [11], etc. In contrast to unconditional text generation, controlled text generative models aim
                                        to construct sentences with specified attributes such as sentiment, tense, or style. Existing state-of-the-art
                                        methods for controlled text generation have mainly focused on disentangling the attribute and content
                                        representation in the latent space and generate sentences from that by modifying the attribute representation.
                                        Such methods have either derived attribute and content representations separately using multiple attribute
                                        specific decoders [7, 10], or used an adversarial setup [9] to make the text representation independent of
                                        attribute information. Another line of work has focused only on style transfer which primarily involves
                                        flipping the style or attribute value of the given sentence. Several recent works [16, 18, 19, 26, 27, 28] have
                                        explored the use of adversarial discriminators for achieving such text style transfer through disentanglement.
                                        However, these methods do not explicitly model the process of fine tuning the attribute values, e.g., changing
                                        sentiment values from extreme positive to neutral to negative, while keeping the content same. Extension of
                                        these models for finer attribute control often fail in mainly two different aspects. They cannot regulate the
                                        attribute smoothly because of multidimensional or structured (one hot encoding) representation space of the
                                        attributes. The disentanglement of the latent space also overlooks the interdependency between attribute
                                        and content. As a result, just modifying the attribute part often leads to the generation of sentences not
                                        having sufficient content overlap with the original sentence.

                                            Disentangling latent features (such as rotation and color) of images [3, 8] is a well explored area in computer
                                        vision. In particular, BetaVAE [8] has modified the Variational Autoencoder with a special emphasis on

                                                                                                              1
KL in order to enforce disentanglement. Further, some other works like [12, 14] have tried to achieve a
trade-off between disentanglement and reconstruction quality. Although these unsupervised approaches have
shown promising results on image data, achieving disentanglement in the latent representation learned for
text generation comes with obvious pitfalls. The difficulty of this task arises from the fact that the text
representation based on recent state-of-the-art methods like BERT [4], Transformer [24], or Seq2seq [21] is
a complex manifold of entangled salient features. These representations are highly expressive for several
downstream tasks including high quality sentence generation that preserves the semantics. Hence, disentangling
the enriched representation space into separate spaces for attribute and content results in neglecting the
complex dependency between them, thereby compromising the quality of text generation. Thus, previous
methods [9, 10, 16, 18, 19, 26, 27, 28] that have tried to achieve attribute control by disentangling the latent
space used for text generation suffer from these aforementioned issues, i.e., generating poor and unrealistic
sentences while trying to fine tune the attribute values. A recent work [25] has proposed attribute transfer
using entangled representation that enables fine tuning of the sentiment polarity. However, it is restricted to
modifying the sentiment of the given sentence to only its opposite polarity using costly Fast-Gradient-Iterative
Modification. We aim to address these shortcomings of existing literature by proposing a trade-off between
preserving entangled representation as a latent space to generate text for better reconstruction, and deriving
a continuous attribute representation in a disentangled space on top of it to fine tune the attribute values.

    In this paper, specifically, we propose the model Disentangled-Entangle-VAE (DE-VAE), a feature
supervised framework that transforms entangled and enriched text representation obtained using BERT
encoder to a higher level representation of sentiment as a specified attribute, along with other unspecified
attributes using a transformation network. DE-VAE enforces disentanglement of the derived representation by
imposing a factored prior which enables independence among different dimensions of the latent representation.
Further, using attribute supervision on the intended dimension of this disentangled representation, we map the
sentiment to a continuous space. For attribute guided text generation, DE-VAE converts the disentangled
representation back to original entangled representation and generate sentence from that. This reverse
transformation helps to preserve the complex relationships between sentiment and other inherent attributes
in an enriched entangled space, thereby generating more meaningful and realistic sentences compared to
competing methods. However, the choice of such transformation networks for transforming from disentangled
to entangled space, and vice-versa is extremely important. The transformation needs to be lossless, otherwise
the decoded entangled space can become different than that of the original text representation. We use the
concept of invertible normalising flow [6, 13, 17] to enforce these transformations. By jointly optimizing
the parameters of transformation network, along with imposing disentanglement constraint and feature
supervision on the feature space, DE-VAE successfully learns how a disentangled space for sentiment and
other unspecified attributes can be converted to a meaningful entangled representation space of the sentence.

    We demonstrate the effectiveness of DE-VAE to generate controlled text by fine tuning sentiment. Using
three large publicly available review datasets, we show that DE-VAE improves the performance significantly
over previous controlled text generative models on three different criteria, namely, sentiment control accuracy,
smooth fine tuning of sentiment in both directions, and content preservation. We show that even a small
difference between the decoded entangled feature space and the original entangled space, introduced by
using an alternative transformation network, can lead to a significant performance drop. Finally, through an
ablation study, we demonstrate the disentanglement achieved by DE-VAE on the derived feature space.

2 DE-VAE : Text generation with fine tuned attributes

In this section, we first give a high level overview of DE-VAE, a hierarchical model for controlled text
generation, starting with describing the data. Next, we describe the key technical aspects of its individual
components with key contributions in detail. Finally, we illustrate the training procedure.

                                                                      2
                                                                           Inverse

                            Normalizing Flow              Generation Normalizing Flow

                                                   (f  )                                              LSTM

                         S                      T              f                            S

                                   2  T            Inference
BERT                            1
                                                               
                                                                                               w1 w2  wn
                                                                        a
                                                                           generated           generated sentence
={1,...,n}                                                  scale          sentiment

                                                              Sentiment
                                                                decoder

                       Encoder                                                      Decoder

Figure 1: The Encoder and Decoder module of DE-VAE. The encoding process takes a word sequence x and

obtain its BERT embedding. Then it converts it to a continuous representation zs followed by transformation
to a feature representation zf using invertible normalising flow. It assigns the last dimension of zf for
sentiment representation za. The decoding process samples zf from prior or posterior. It decodes sentiment
from the za. Then the feature representation zf is transformed to the sentence representation zs via an
inverse flow. zs is then used to generate the word sequence x.

2.1 Model overview

We consider an input set X = {x0, · · · , xM-1} of M observed sentences sampled from some underlying
unknown data distribution pD. Along with the sentences, we have the corresponding ground truth observed
attribute, sentiment, denoted as F = {f0, · · · , fM-1}. Here fi is associated to sentence xi. For ease
of reference, we will henceforth denote a training instance xi and fi by x and f respectively. Detailed
architectural overview of DE-VAE is shown in Figure 1. The whole architecture can be divided into two
modules consisting of a hierarchical encoder and a corresponding hierarchical decoder. We start by describing
the inference model (encoder) followed by the generation model (decoder).

2.2 Inference model

The inference model is designed as a bottom-up hierarchical encoder. It has two distinct layers for modeling
word sequence representation zs, and derived feature representation zf . The posterior distribution of our
hierarchical inference mechanism can be represented as a factored model like:

                                      q(z|x) = q(zs|x) q(zf |zs)                                                   (1)

                                                   Entangled Disentangled

We design an entangled sentence encoder q(zs|x) in the lowest layer as follows. Given a word sequence

x, we obtain the word embeddings Ew for each word w in x from the BERT pre-trained model [22]. Then

we combine these representations to generate an aggregated sentence encoding Es and transform it into a
continuous Gaussian space zs  Rd, as follows:

                                                                           1           e
                       Ew = {e1, . . . , e|x|} = BERT(x), Es = |x|
                                                                              eEw

                       q(zs|x) = N (µs, diag(s2)) where [µs, s] = g(Es)                                            (2)

We transform Es to a Gaussian distribution parameterized by [µs, s] using a fully connected neural network
g. The sentence representation zs  Rd is an entangled representation with d dimensions. Next, we aim
to transform this representation zs to another representation zf  Rd on which we can impose feature

supervision and disentanglement for attribute control. Design of q(zf |zs) is crucial for fine-tuned attribute

control. First, it should transfer all the necessary information of zs to zf so that we can leverage the

information for sentiment supervision on zf . Most importantly, the transformation needs to be invertible. As

we are interested to control the attribute by modulating zf , and then transforming back to zs distribution

                                                          3
space, any transformation other than an invertible one will lead to some different distribution space causing
important information loss. Hence, we use an invertible normalizing flow [6, 13, 17] to design q(zf |zs).

    A normalizing flow is a powerful transformation function which applies a chain of invertible parametrized
transformations ft(t = 1, . . . , T ) to its input (here zs) such that the outcome of the last iteration, zT , has a
more flexible distribution (here zf ). We have used an effective autoregressive transformation flow R-NVP [6],
which copies the first k dimensions (1 < k < d) of the input, while shifting and scaling all the remaining ones.
Specifically, the estimated approximate transformation flow ft, i.e. qt(zt|zt-1), can be characterized as:

        zt(1:k) = zt-1(1:k), and zt(k+1:d) = zt-1(k+1:d) · t + µt, where [µt, t] = t(zt-1(1:k))                          (3)

Here, t are designed as multilayer fully connected feed-forward networks which are not invertible However,
a careful inspection of Eq 3 reveals that given zt, the input zt-1 can be fully recovered. So this makes the
transformation flow ft invertible. Thus, we can write q(zf |zs) := q(zT |zs) and we assign zf := zT . From
the characterization of R-NVP, we observe that zf (k+1:d) will have the aggregated information coming from
all dimensions of zs. So we pick the dth (last) dimension of zf as za to further fine-tune it using sentiment
supervision which we will discuss in detail in the next section. The rest of the dimensions of zf are kept for
unspecified features denoted by zu. We will discuss how we achieve the disentanglement of zf in Sec. 2.4
while discussing the training objective.

2.3 Generative model

We design our generative model p using a top-down hierarchy, with two different variables zs and zf . The
overall distribution of the latent variables is defined as:

                                          p(z) = p(zf ) p(zs|zf )                                                        (4)

                                                          Disentangled Entangled

Here p(zf ) is a factored prior of the feature representation zf , which can be expressed as zf =                d    p (zfi  ).
                                                                                                                 i=1

As discussed in the previous section, we have designated the last dimension of the disentangled attribute

representation to capture sentiment, and remaining dimensions for unspecified features. Henceforth, sentiment

representation can be sampled from za  p(zfd) and unspecified representations can be sampled as zu 

d-1  p  (zfi  ).  The  factorized  prior  distribution    p(zf )  is  designed  to  be  standard  normal  distribution,  hence
i=1

p(zfi )  N (0, I) i in [1, d]. To facilitate smooth interpolation in sentiment space, which is one of the major

differences of DE-VAE than other alternatives, we use feature supervision on za as follows. Given za, we

try to decode the sentiment of the given sentence x and back propagate the classification error to modify the

values of za. More specifically, the decoding distribution for the ground truth sentiment is represented as:

                                          p(f |za) = Categorical((za))                                                   (5)

Here  is a scaling network to convert the single value za into a two dimensional logit to calculate the
likelihood of ground-truth sentiment. Next, the network tries to decode the entangled distribution zs from
the disentangled distribution zf . As described in Eq. 3, we apply the reverse transformation flow to recover
zs using T inverse flows ft-1(t = 1, . . . , T ). Starting from zT , denoted by zf , we obtain ft-1, i.e. pt(zt-1|zt),
described using the inverse transformation flow below:

                  zt(1:k) = zt+1(1:k),  and zt(k+1:d) =   zt+1(k+1:d)     -  µt          [µt, t]  =  t(zt(1:k))          (6)
                                                                   t            , where

It may be noted that µt and t are derived from the neural network t which is shared between the encoder
and decoder. The log probability density of p(zs|zf ), i.e. log pT (zs|zf ), [6] becomes equivalent to:

                                   log    pT (zs|zf )  =  log  p(zf )  -   T   log  det dft                              (7)
                                                                          t=1           dft-1

                                                               4
Finally, with the decoded zs, we sample the word sequence as follows:

                 h(j) = r(x(j - 1), zs) and x(j)  Softmax(m(h(j)))                          (8)

Here r is a gated recurrent unit, which takes the previously generated token x(j - 1) and the sentence
representation zs to generate the hidden state h(j). Then we pass this hidden state information to a
feedforward network m to generate logits. Subsequently, we sample words based on the softmax distribution
of the generated logits. We define the joint likelihood of the sentence, features and the latent variables as:

p(x, f , zs, zf ) = p(x|zs)p(f |zf )p(zs|zf )p(zf ) = p(x|zs)p(f |za)p(zs|zf )p(zf )        (9)

2.4 Training

Instead of optimizing the joint likelihood given in Eq. 9 by training both layers of the hierarchy simultaneously,
we train DE-VAE in two phases. First, we train the lower layer which is responsible for sentence reconstruction;
next, we train the transformation flow network as well as the upper layer. We train the lower layer by
maximizing the marginal likelihood of the input sentence x as follows:

            log p(x)  Eq(zs|x)log p(x|zs) - KL(q(zs|x)||p(zs))                              (10)

Next, we update the flow parameters (Eq. (7)) and impose feature supervision by maximizing the lower
bound of marginal likelihood of zs which is log p(zs) :

Eq(zf |zs)  log  p(f |za)  +  log  p(zf )  -   T   log  det dft    - KL(q(zf |zs)||p(zf ))  (11)
                                              t=1           dft-1

    We may further breakdown the KL term of the above objective function by taking an expectation over zs
as following:

                 Ezq(zs)I(zs, zf ) + KL(q(zf |zs)||p(zf ))                                  (12)

                                                                Total Correlation

As p(zf ) is fully factorized, minimizing the above total correlation loss will benefit the model in achieving
disentanglement of zf along the dimensions[8]. It is also important that a specified disentangled part of zf ,
for a designated sentiment f , should carry enough information about that sentiment. Hence, the mutual

information between the sentiment f and za should be high. This mutual information can be computed using
entropy function H(.) as:

I(f, za) = H(f ) - H(f |za)  ExpD [Eq(zs|x)q(za|zs)log p(f |za)]                            (13)

As I(f, za) is lower bounded by the likelihood p(f |za), we provide extra emphasis of the likelihood term in
the objective function. To optimize the upper layer and flow parameters we maximize the lower bound of
log p(zs) as below:

Eq(zf |zs)  log  p(f |za)  +  log  p(zf )  -   T   log  det dft    - KL(q(zf |zs)||p(zf ))  (14)
                                              t=1           dft-1

where  and  are regularizing parameters to emphasize on increasing the sentiment likelihood and enforce
the disentanglement of zf . Updating the flow parameters along with high emphasis on disentanglement and
feature supervision using Eq 14 helps the model to learn the complex transformation of independent features
zu and za to an enriched entangled zs. The specific details of implementation is provided in the Appendix A.

                                              5
                   Yelp             Amazon                  IMDB
                                    Controlled              Controlled
  Methods    Controlled Text style  generation  Text style  generation  Text style
                                                transfer                transfer
   ctrlGen   generation transfer        0.62                    0.76
     DAE                                0.84       0.63         0.82       0.77
             0.72        0.70                      0.77                    0.81
entangleGen                               -        0.82           -        0.66
             0.95        0.80

             -           0.94

DE-VAE-NR    0.62        0.58       0.59        0.51        0.59        0.53

DE-VAE       0.95        0.84       0.84        0.90        0.90        0.86

Table 1: Controlled generation and Text style transfer accuracy achieved by different methods.

3 Experimental evaluation

In this section, we evaluate the performance of DE-VAE in terms of sentiment control using three different
evaluation criteria - (a) sentiment control accuracy, (b) fine tuning of sentiment, and (c) content preservation.
Additionally, we also discuss the extent of disentanglement in the latent space zf .

    For our evaluation, we rely on three large review datasets for sentiment controlled text generation - (a)
Yelp [25] with 443248, 2000, and 1000 number of labeled data on restaurant review for training, validation,
and test respectively with a vocabulary size of 9.5K, (b) Amazon [25] with 554997, 2000, and 2000 number of
labeled data on product review for training, validation, and test respectively with a vocabulary size 25K, and
(c) IMDB [5] movie review corpus which consists of 708929, 4000, and 2000 number of unlabeled training,
validation, and test data with a vocabulary size of 28K. This IMDB data has been tagged by Stanford
sentiment tagger [20] and converted to three sentiment labels, namely, positive, neutral, and negative.

    We compare the performance of DE-VAE with the following baselines that focuses on controlled text
generation using disentanglement - (a) ctrlGen [9] which is a semi-supervised method for sentiment oriented
text generation, and (b) DAE [10] which is a supervised method that focuses on disentanglement using
adversarial loss. Other than these, we also compare DE-VAE with entangleGen [25] which focuses on
text style transfer using entangled representation. Apart from these state-of-the-art baselines, we also use
DE-VAE-NR (DE-VAE Non-Reversible transformation) as a baseline which is a variation of DE-VAE.
In DE-VAE-NR, we replace the invertible normalizing flow used in DE-VAE with two neural networks
designed as a two layer fully connected feedforward network responsible for capturing q(zf |zs) and p(zs|zf ).

3.1 Sentiment control accuracy

Here we measure the quality of sentiment control by quantitatively evaluating the sentiment oriented sentence
generation accuracy. For this purpose, we train a sentiment classifier by extending BERT [4]. This classifier
is 95% accurate on Yelp data and 85% accurate on Amazon and IMDB data which demonstrates its robustness.
Specifically, DE-VAE generates sentences by regulating the values in the designated dimension of zf which
is modeled to control the sentiment; we use the pre-trained sentiment classifier to assign sentiment labels to
the generated sentences. Similarly, we generate sentences using the baseline methods. We report the accuracy
of sentiment oriented sentence generation in two different ways - (a) Controlled generation accuracy
which is accuracy of generating sentences where the generative representation is sampled from the prior (i.e.,
from p(zf ) in case of DE-VAE), followed by assigning the desired value for the sentiment representation
(i.e., za for DE-VAE), and (b) Text style transfer accuracy which is accuracy of generating sentences
with opposite polarity sentiment from the representation of a sentence x, bearing a specific type of sentiment
(in our case, zf  q(zf |zs)q(zs|x), as it regulates sentiment).

    From the results reported in Table 1, it can be observed that DE-VAE outperforms all competing
methods across all datasets for controlled text generation, other than text style transfer accuracy in case
of Yelp. The superior performance of DE-VAE stems from the fact that it learns a disentangled feature
representation where sentiment information is modeled in a single dimension which is independent of other
dimensions. So, regulating the sentiment value along this designated dimension gives better control while
generating sentences bearing the same sentiment. Further, in case of DE-VAE-NR, we train the parameters
of the transformation network by maximizing the likelihood of zs, i.e. Eq(zs|x)p(zs|zf ), such that the

                                                                      6
    (a) Yelp (Positive)           (b) Amazon (Positive)     (c) Yelp (Negative)             (d) Amazon (Negative)

    (e) Yelp (Positive)           (f) Amazon (Positive)     (g) Yelp (Negative)             (h) Amazon (Negative)

Figure 2: Upper row denotes variation of average sentiment score of generated sentences with fine-tuned

degree of sentiment control. Bottom row indicates variation of Jaccard score of generated sentences with

fine-tuned degree of sentiment control. The original sentence's sentiment is in brackets.

minimum KL between q(zf |zs) and p(zs|zf ) is found to be in the range 0.2 - 0.4 across all datasets;
however, the performance of DE-VAE-NR is significantly inferior compared to DE-VAE. Close inspection
reveals that even though the KL was low, as the decoded distribution zs was not exactly the same as the
encoded distribution, it was generating sentences very different from the original sentences. This shows the
importance of invertible normalizing flow as a design choice.

    The closest competitor to our method is DAE for controlled text generation with comparable performance
to DE-VAE. The reason is that DAE achieves disentanglement between style space and content space using
extensive adversarial training and incorporates auxiliary multi-task loss for sentiment or style. Further, in
comparison to other methods, ctrlGen performs poorly for controlled text generation. We speculate that
ctrlGen has comparatively less control than other methods since it does not model feature representation
from sentence representation and tries to control generation by providing only a one hot encoding of sentiment
externally. We have reported the accuracy of entangleGen only for text style transfer in Table 1 since it
focuses only on attribute transfer. We observe that entangleGen achieves better accuracy on Yelp dataset
than our method; however, DE-VAE performs better on all other datasets. Since entangleGen inherently
supports binary-valued attributes by design, it can best modify the sentiment value towards its opposite
polarity using Fast-Gradient-Iterative-Modification. Hence, its performance suffers in IMDB data where there
are more than two sentiment values.

3.2 Fine tuning of sentiment and Content preservation

In this section, we discuss the performance of DE-VAE in terms of both the evaluation criteria - fine tuning

of sentiment, and content preservation. As by design, DE-VAE is able to capture the entire behaviour of the

sentiment in a continuous latent space of a single dimension, we first estimate the maximum value fmax and

the minimum value fmin of this dimension from the training data. Then we use this range and interpolate

between fmaxand fmin in 20 different sentiment levels where the value of ith level li (1  i  20) is denoted

as  fmin +  . (fmax -fmin )(i-1)  Given  a  feature  representation  zf  corresponding  to  a  sentence  x,  we  assign  a

                        19

level to za (last dimension of zf ) and sample 100 sentences corresponding to this modified za. We repeat this

procedure corresponding to each level. Similarly, we extend ctrlGen to generate sentences by interpolating

20 different values sampled from the range [0, 1] for the structured two-dimensional sentiment representation.

As entangleGen can only regulate the sentiment of the given sentence in the opposite polarity using 35

different degrees of sentiment, we have aggregated them within ten sentiment levels. It may be noted that we

                                                         7
levels Original Sentence - Positive                                        Original Sentence - Negative

original i ' m very impressed with the level of care here !                but their inventory was questionable !

l1        i am totally disappointed by the help completely not caring .    but their selection was overpriced !

l5        i am totally disappointed with the compassion ( not caring ) .   but their was inventory was ridiculous !

l10       i am totally disappointed by the owners ... not caring .         but their inventory was awful !

l13       i am not totally disappointed by the caring staff !              but their inventory was empty !

l16       i am highly recommend - this resort trulycare !                  their inventory was impressive !

l20       i am truly kind of `impressed' - oh highly recommend this staff ! their selection was outstanding !

Table 2: Fine grained sentiment control of sentences from extreme negative to extreme positive. Bold letters

indicates words with sentiment and the color blue indicates important words to be preserved.

have excluded DAE from this evaluation since it models sentiment in a multi-dimensional space and fine

tuning sentiment in such a space is non-trivial and needs separate investigation. Additionally, we have also

excluded comparison with DE-VAE-NR due to its poor performance on sentiment control.

    To quantitatively measure the performance of fine tuning of sentiment, we have used the pre-trained

Stanford sentiment regressor [20] which provides sentiment scores of sentences generated for DE-VAE and

other methods between [0, 1] with 1 denoting most positive and 0 denoting most negative. Further, we

evaluate the model performance in terms of content preservation while fine tuning sentiment. For this purpose,

we compute Jaccard overlap [23] of unigram words in the original sentence x and the generated sentence y,

computed  as  , |wx wy |  where  w.  denotes  the  set  of   words  after  excluding  stopwords  in  corresponding  sentence.

              |wxwy |

    In Figure 2, we have demonstrated the variation of mean sentiment scores (Figures 2(a)-(d)) and Jaccard

overlap scores (Figures 2(e)-(h)) for different li (with 1 denoting most negative and 20 denoting most positive

control signal). We separately show the variations of mean positive (negative) sentiment value over the

different levels when starting sentiment was negative (positive). We can observe from Figure 2(a) that the

sentiment scores vary over a large range (0.17) between the first and last levels for DE-VAE in case of

Yelp when the original sentence is positive; however, entangleGen can achieve a greater negative sentiment

score for levels 1 - 4. In comparison to these methods, ctrlGen shows a very small drift (0.1) in sentiment

scores over all the levels with almost zero variation for levels 13 - 20. This implies that ctrlGen has lesser

control in fine tuning sentiment scores over the levels compared to DE-VAE. Interestingly, if we check the

corresponding variation of Jaccard overlap in Figure 2(e), we find that the sentences generated by ctrlGen

while fine tuning sentiment performs poorly in terms of preserving content. For entangleGen, the Jaccard

overlap is high only for the levels 6 - 8. On the other-hand, the Jaccard overlap scores are high for DE-VAE

over all the levels demonstrating its effectiveness in content preservation while fine tuning sentiment.

    In case of Amazon data, Figure 2(b) shows that we can easily achieve a smooth variation in the negative

sentiment scores for DE-VAE with a reasonably high drift of 0.08 between the first and last levels. Compared

to DE-VAE, ctrlGen shows negligible drift for levels 11 - 20. Figure 2(b) also shows that entangleGen

performs poorly in fine tuning the sentiment for Amazon. Looking into the corresponding Jaccard overlap

scores in Figure 2(f), it can be easily observed that DE-VAE achieves higher Jaccard overlap scores compared

to other methods with low scores only for the last few levels. Similar observation holds true for the opposite

case when the original sentence is negative across all datasets as evident from Figures 2(c)-(d) and Figures 2(g)-

(h). This signifies the fact that DE-VAE can achieve a superior fine tuning of sentiment while preserving

the content of generated sentences compared to the state-of-the-art methods. Since we could not observe any

significant variation in sentiment scores of generated sentences for IMDB over different levels for any of the

methods, we have not discussed these results for the IMDB dataset.

    Further, we have sampled an original sentence from the data and have shown the corresponding generated

sentences using DE-VAE for different levels in Table 2. As evident from this table, we are able to preserve

the content and semantics of the original sentence while still observing a smooth interpolation in the degree of

sentiment transfer. An interesting observation is that though the exact word overlap is low for the generated

sentences with very high sentiment scores (e.g., l1 and l20 in Table 2), they are semantically similar to the

original sentence. We show more qualitative results in Appendix B.

                                                               8
3.3 Ablation study

Here we perform an ablation study by demonstrating the importance of the last dimension za of the
representation zf in capturing sentiment. As we ensure independence of every dimension, we calculate the
correlation of every dimension of zf with the sentiment labels in the test data. We observe that za achieves
the highest correlation of 0.72 in Yelp and 0.42 in Amazon. We further train a logistic regression classifier
with za of training data as a feature to predict sentiment labels, and we achieve a high accuracy of 0.85 and
0.64 on test data in Yelp and Amazon respectively. While training with the most correlated dimension of
zf other than za, with a correlation of 0.12 for Yelp and 0.14 for Amazon, we achieve an accuracy of only
0.52 and 0.58 respectively. This implies that za is the most expressive dimension for capturing sentiment in
comparison to any other dimension.

4 Conclusion

The major contribution of this paper is to propose DE-VAE which consists of a carefully designed hierarchical
architecture to maintain both the disentangled feature representation and entangled sentence representation.
The invertible normalizing flow as a transformation module between the two representation layers of DE-
VAE enables learning of complex interdependency between disentangled feature and entangled sentence
representation without the loss of information. Such a design choice is key to achieving accurate fine tuning
of sentiment while keeping the content intact. This is a key achievement considering the difficulty of the
problem and modest performance of state-of-the-art techniques. Extensive experiments on real-world datasets
emphatically establish the well-rounded performance of DE-VAE and its superiority over the baselines.

References

 [1] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and
      translate. arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.0473, 2014.

 [2] S. R. Bowman, L. Vilnis, O. Vinyals, and Dai. Generating sentences from a continuous space. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:1511.06349, 2015.

 [3] X. Chen, Y. Duan, R. Houthooft, J. Schulman, I. Sutskever, and P. Abbeel. Infogan: Interpretable
      representation learning by information maximizing generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural
      information processing systems, pages 2172­2180, 2016.

 [4] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers
      for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

 [5] Q. Diao, M. Qiu, C.-Y. Wu, A. J. Smola, J. Jiang, and C. Wang. Jointly modeling aspects, ratings and
      sentiments for movie recommendation (jmars). In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international
      conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 193­202, 2014.

 [6] L. Dinh, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and S. Bengio. Density estimation using real nvp. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:1605.08803, 2016.

 [7] Z. Fu, X. Tan, N. Peng, D. Zhao, and R. Yan. Style transfer in text: Exploration and evaluation. In
     Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2018.

 [8] I. Higgins, L. Matthey, A. Pal, C. Burgess, X. Glorot, M. Botvinick, S. Mohamed, and A. Lerchner.
      beta-vae: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational framework. ICLR, 2(5):6, 2017.

 [9] Z. Hu, Z. Yang, X. Liang, R. Salakhutdinov, and E. P. Xing. Toward controlled generation of text. In
      Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70, pages 1587­1596.
      JMLR. org, 2017.

                                                                      9
[10] V. John, L. Mou, H. Bahuleyan, and O. Vechtomova. Disentangled representation learning for non-parallel
      text style transfer. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.04339, 2018.

[11] A. Kannan and O. Vinyals. Adversarial evaluation of dialogue models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.08198,
      2017.

[12] H. Kim and A. Mnih. Disentangling by factorising. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05983, 2018.

[13] D. P. Kingma, T. Salimans, R. Jozefowicz, X. Chen, I. Sutskever, and M. Welling. Improved variational
      inference with inverse autoregressive flow. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages
      4743­4751, 2016.

[14] A. Kumar, P. Sattigeri, and A. Balakrishnan. Variational inference of disentangled latent concepts from
      unlabeled observations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00848, 2017.

[15] P. Li, W. Lam, L. Bing, and Z. Wang. Deep recurrent generative decoder for abstractive text summa-
      rization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00625, 2017.

[16] L. Logeswaran, H. Lee, and S. Bengio. Content preserving text generation with attribute controls. In
      Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 5103­5113, 2018.

[17] D. J. Rezende and S. Mohamed. Variational inference with normalizing flows. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1505.05770, 2015.

[18] T. Shen, T. Lei, R. Barzilay, and T. Jaakkola. Style transfer from non-parallel text by cross-alignment.
      In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 6830­6841, 2017.

[19] A. Singh and R. Palod. Sentiment transfer using seq2seq adversarial autoencoders. arXiv preprint
     arXiv:1804.04003, 2018.

[20] R. Socher, A. Perelygin, J. Wu, J. Chuang, C. D. Manning, A. Ng, and C. Potts. Recursive deep models
      for semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on
     empirical methods in natural language processing, pages 1631­1642, 2013.

[21] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le. Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks. In Advances
      in neural information processing systems, pages 3104­3112, 2014.

[22] I. Turc, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. Well-read students learn better: On the importance
      of pre-training compact models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.08962v2, 2019.

[23] N. Tustison and J. Gee. Introducing dice, jaccard, and other label overlap measures to itk. Insight J, 2,
      2009.

[24] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin.
      Attention is all you need. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 5998­6008, 2017.

[25] K. Wang, H. Hua, and X. Wan. Controllable unsupervised text attribute transfer via editing entangled
      latent representation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 11034­11044, 2019.

[26] Y. Zhang, N. Ding, and R. Soricut. Shaped: Shared-private encoder-decoder for text style adaptation.
     arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.04093, 2018.

[27] Z. Zhang, S. Ren, S. Liu, J. Wang, P. Chen, M. Li, M. Zhou, and E. Chen. Style transfer as unsupervised
      machine translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07894, 2018.

[28] J. Zhao, Y. Kim, K. Zhang, A. M. Rush, and Y. LeCun. Adversarially regularized autoencoders. arXiv
      preprint arXiv:1706.04223, 2017.

                                                                     10
A Parameter Setting

The sentence encoder is designed using pre-trained BERT-base-uncased model (embedding dim = 768)
followed by 2-layer feed-forward network with hidden dim 200. The output of the same is the sentence
embedding which is of dimension 256 for Yelp and 300 for Amazon, and IMDB. The flow network is designed
as R-NVP with T = 3 and each t is designed as three layer feed forward network with tanh activation
function for the initial two layers and hidden dimension is 100 for the intermediate layers. The scaling
network for sentiment classification is designed as a two dimensional vector [-1, 1]. The sentence decoder is
designed as a gated recurrent unit where output of each step is passed through a fully connected feed-forward
network to convert it to a logit of length of the vocabulary size. To avoid vanishingly small KL term in the
VAE module Eq. 11, we use a KL term weight linearly annealing from 0 to 1 during training. The weighing
parameters  and  are set to 10 for feature supervision and disentanglement .

B Qualitative samples

In Table 3, we have provided some comparative examples of the sentiment fine-tuning results. It can be seen
that ctrlGen provides both positive and negative polarity sentences, but there is very less content overlap in
comparison to entangleGen and DE-VAE. On further scrutiny we discover, it can only retain content for
smaller length sentences with less content words. Some examples are given in Table 4.

       DE-VAE                                   entangleGen                         ctrlGen

Orig.          the house fried rice and egg rolls are the best in phoenix .
l1
l5     the fried rice dishes are not acceptable the house too way                   rustrated !
l8
l10    ,and extremely disappointed .            and egg should ? "
l12
l16    the eggs benedict fried rice and         the house too way and egg rolls     this is n't the only restaurant .
l20    the rice dishes are not acceptable .     were the barely in nothing ?

       the rice dishes of fried rice ,          the house fried rice and egg rolls  their fish is soggy .
       which is not the perfect                 were the only in phoenix table .

       the rice dishes up fried rice ,          the house fried rice and egg rolls  i will return to give you right new .
       which is not the wonderful .             are the best in phoenix only .

       the rice combo is the average ,          -                                   the grand staff is nice .
       eggs and authentic.

       the rice ( the chicken ) are the best ,  -                                   friendly staff is impeccably neat
       and the same for the staff

       the rice ( the chicken ) are the best    -                                   bar tender and professional .

               Table 3: Comparative example with DE-VAE and other methods

               DE-VAE                                        ctrlGen

       Orig.   food was good , but service was great .
       l1
       l20     aweful service                                hate the food , service just .

       Orig.   food was great service was good too . great food .
       l1
       l20     will make this place a regular staple .       do n't make this place .
               will make this place aweful                   i love this place .
               will make this place great

               Table 4: Sample generated text from shorter original text

C Training time comparison

In this section we provide a comparative analysis of training time and sampling time of DE-VAE with
entangleGen. Fig 3 shows that DE-VAE is much faster than that of entangleGen for both cases.

                                                                     11
(a) Training time      (b) Generation time

Figure 3: (a) the time taken (per epoch) for training by DE-VAE and entangleGen on different datasets. (b)

the time taken to generate 1K sentences by DE-VAE and entangleGen on different datasets.

                   12
