                                       Parameterized Explainer for Graph Neural Network

                                       Dongsheng Luo1 Wei Cheng2 Dongkuan Xu1 Wenchao Yu2             Bo Zong2
                                                                    Haifeng Chen2 Xiang Zhang1
arXiv:2011.04573v1 [cs.LG] 9 Nov 2020                             1The Pennsylvania State University
                                                                           2NEC Labs America

                                                                 1{dul262,dux19,xzz89}@psu.edu
                                                       2{weicheng,wyu,bzong,haifeng}@nec-labs.com

                                                                                   Abstract

                                                  Despite recent progress in Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), explaining predictions
                                                  made by GNNs remains a challenging open problem. The leading method indepen-
                                                  dently addresses the local explanations (i.e., important subgraph structure and node
                                                  features) to interpret why a GNN model makes the prediction for a single instance,
                                                  e.g. a node or a graph. As a result, the explanation generated is painstakingly
                                                  customized for each instance. The unique explanation interpreting each instance
                                                  independently is not sufficient to provide a global understanding of the learned
                                                  GNN model, leading to the lack of generalizability and hindering it from being used
                                                  in the inductive setting. Besides, as it is designed for explaining a single instance,
                                                  it is challenging to explain a set of instances naturally (e.g., graphs of a given
                                                  class). In this study, we address these key challenges and propose PGExplainer, a
                                                  parameterized explainer for GNNs. PGExplainer adopts a deep neural network to
                                                  parameterize the generation process of explanations, which enables PGExplainer a
                                                  natural approach to explaining multiple instances collectively. Compared to the
                                                  existing work, PGExplainer has better generalization ability and can be utilized
                                                  in an inductive setting easily. Experiments on both synthetic and real-life datasets
                                                  show highly competitive performance with up to 24.7% relative improvement in
                                                  AUC on explaining graph classification over the leading baseline.

                                       1 Introduction

                                       Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are powerful tools for representation learning of graph-structured
                                       data, such as social networks [46], document citation graphs [33], and microbiological graphs [44].
                                       GNNs broadly adopt a message passing scheme to learn node representations by aggregating rep-
                                       resentation vectors of its neighbors [49, 16]. This scheme enables GNN to capture both node
                                       features and graph topology. GNN-based methods have achieved state-of-the-art performance in node
                                       classification, graph classification, and link prediction, etc [21, 45, 56].

                                       Despite their remarkable effectiveness, the rationales of predictions made by GNNs are not easy
                                       for humans to understand. Since GNNs aggregate both node features and graph topology to make
                                       predictions, to understand predictions made by GNNs, important subgraphs and/or a set of features,
                                       which are also known as explanations, need to be uncovered. In the literature, although a variety of
                                       efforts have been undertaken to interpret general deep neural networks, existing approaches [6, 26,
                                       12, 31, 43, 19, 20] in this line fall short in their ability to explain graph structures, which is essential
                                       for GNNs. Explaining predictions made by GNNs remains a challenging open problem, on which
                                       few methods have been proposed. The combinatorial nature of explaining graph structures makes it
                                       difficult to design models that are both robust and efficient. Recently, the first general model-agnostic

                                           Equal Contribution

                                       34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.
Mutagen 1 Mutagen 2 Nonmutagen1                    Explanation for
                                                      mutagens

                                 GNN  PGExplainer

Figure 1: PGExplainer provides human-understandable explanations for predictions made by GNNs.
The left part shows the process of applying GNNs for graph classification on the MUTAG dataset. A
GNN based model is trained to predict their mutagenic effects. As a post-hoc method, PGExplainer
takes the trained GNN model as input and provides consistent explanations for predictions made by
the GNN model. For the mutagen molecule graphs in the example, the explanation is the N O2 group.

approach for GNNs, GNNExplainer [53], was proposed to address the problem. It takes a trained
GNN and its predictions as inputs to provide interpretable explanations for a given instance, e.g. a
node or a graph. The explanation includes a compact subgraph structure and a small subset of node
features that are crucial in GNN's prediction for the target instance. Nevertheless, there are several
limitations in the existing approach. First, GNNExplainer largely focuses on providing the local
interpretability by generating a painstakingly customized explanation for a single instance individually
and independently. The explanation provided by GNNExplainer is limited to the single instance,
making GNNExplainer difficult to be applied in the inductive setting because the explanations are hard
to generalize to other unexplained nodes. As pointed out in previous studies, models interpreting each
instance independently are not sufficient to provide a global understanding of the trained model [19].
Furthermore, GNNExplainer has to be retrained for every single explanation. As a result, in real-life
scenarios where plenty of nodes need to be interpreted, GNNExplainer would be time-consuming
and impractical. Moreover, as GNNExplainer was developed for interpreting individual instances,
the explanatory motifs are not learned end-to-end with a global view of the whole GNN model. Thus,
it may suffer from suboptimal generalization performance. How to explain predictions of GNNs on a
set of instances collectively and easily generalize the learned explainer model to other instances in
the inductive setting remains largely unexplored in the literature.

To provide a global understanding of predictions made by GNNs, in this study, we emphasize the
collective and inductive nature of this problem and present our method PGExplainer (Figure 1).
PGExplainer is a general explainer that applies to any GNN based models in both transductive
and inductive settings. Specifically, a generative probabilistic model for graph data is utilized in
PGExplainer. Generative models have shown the power to learn succinct underlying structures from
the observed graph data [23]. PGExplainer uncovers these underlying structures as the explanations,
which is believed to make the most contribution to GNNs' predictions [35]. We model the underlying
structure as edge distributions, where the explanatory graph is sampled. To collectively explain
predictions of multiple instances, the generation process in PGExplainer is parameterized with a deep
neural network. Since the neural network parameters are shared across the population of explained
instances, PGExplainer is naturally applicable to provide model-level explanations for each instance
with a global view of the GNN model. Furthermore, PGExplainer has better generalization power
because a trained PGExplainer model can be utilized in an inductive setting to infer explanations of
unexplained nodes without retraining the explanation model. This also makes PGExplainer much
faster than the existing approaches.

Experimental results on both synthetic and real-life datasets demonstrate that PGExplainer can
achieve consistent and accurate explanations, bringing up to 24.7% improvement in AUC over the
SOTA method on explaining graph classification with significant speed-up.

2 Related work

Graph neural networks. Graph Neural networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable success in
various tasks, including node classification [25, 21, 45, 48], graph classification [10], and link
prediction [56]. The study of GNNs was initiated in [17], and then extended in [41]. These methods
iteratively aggregate neighbor information to learn node representations until reaching a static state.
Inspired by the success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in computer vision, attempts of
applying convolutional operations to graphs were derived based on graph spectral theory [4] and

                                                           2
graph Fourier transformation [42]. In recent work, GNNs broadly encode node features as messages
and adopt the message passing mechanism to propagate and aggregate them along edges to learn
node/graph representations, which are then utilized for downstream tasks [25, 10, 41, 29, 45, 34, 47].
For efficiency consideration, localized filters were proposed to reduce computation cost [21]. The self-
attention mechanism was introduced to GNNs in GAT to differentiate the importance of neighbors [45].
Xu. et al. analyzed the relationship between GNNs and Weisfeiler-Lehman graph isomorphism test,
and showed the express power of GNNs [49].

Explaining GNNs. Interpretability and feature selection have been extensively addressed in neu-
ral networks. Methods demystifying complicated deep learning models can be grouped into two
main families, whitebox and blackbox [19, 20]. Whitebox mechanisms mainly focus on yielding
explanations for individual predictions. Forward and backward propagation based methods are
used routinely in whitebox mechanisms. Forward propagation based methods broadly perturb the
input and/or hidden representations and check the corresponding updating results in the downstream
task [8, 14, 28]. The underlying intuition is that the outputs of the downstream task are likely to
significantly change if important features are occluded. Backward propagation based methods, in
general, infer important features from the gradients of the deep neural networks. They compute
weights of features by propagating the gradients from the output back to the input. Blackbox methods
generate explanations by locally learning interpretable models, such as linear models, and additive
models to approximate the predictions [32, 5].

Following the line of forward propagation methods, GNNExplainer initiates the research on explaining
predictions on graph-structured data [53]. It excludes certain edges and node features to observe
the changes in node/graph classification. Explanations (subgraphs/important features) are extracted
by maximizing the mutual information between the distribution of possible subgraphs and the
GNN's prediction. However, similar to other forward propagation methods, GNNExplainer generates
customized explanations for single instance prediction independently, making it insufficient to provide
a global understanding of the trained GNN model. Besides, it is naturally difficult to be applied in
the inductive setting and provide explanations for multiple instances. XGNN provides model-level
explanations without preserving the local fidelity [55]. Thus, the generated explanation may not be a
substructure of the real input graph. On the other hand, PGExplainer can provide an explanation for
each instance with a global view of the GNN model, which can preserve the local fidelity.

Graph generation. PGExplainer learns a probabilistic graph generative model to provide explana-
tions for GNNs. The first model generating random graph is the Erdos­Rényi model [15, 11]. In the
random graph proposed by Gilbert, each potential edge is independently chosen from a Bernoulli
distribution. Some approaches generate graphs with certain properties reflected, such as pairwise
distances betweenness [7], node degree distribution [27], and spectral properties [22, 2]. In recent
years, deep learning models have shown great potential to generate graphs with complex properties
preserved [54, 18, 35]. However, these methods mainly aim to generate graphs that reflect certain
properties in the training graphs.

3 Background

We first describe notations, and then provide some background on graph neural networks.

Notations. Let G = (V, E) represent the graph with V = {v1, v2...vN } denoting the node set and
E  V × V as the edge set. The numbers of nodes and edges are denoted by N and M , respectively.
A graph can be described by an adjacency matrix A  {0, 1}N×N , with aij = 1 if there is an edge
connecting node i and j, and aij = 0 otherwise. Nodes in V are associated with the d-dimensional
features, denoted by X  RN×d.

Graph neural networks. GNNs adopt the message-passing mechanism to propagate and aggregate
information along edges in the input graph to learn node representations [25, 21, 45, 16]. Each
GNN layer includes three essential steps. First, at the propagation step of the i-th GNN layer, for
each edge (i, j), GNN computes a message milj = Message(hli-1, hjl-1), where hli-1 and hjl-1
are representations of vi and vj in previous layer, respectively. Second, at the aggregation step,
for each node vi, GNN aggregates messages received from its neighbor nodes, denoted by Ni,
with an aggregation function mil· = aggregation({milj|j  Ni}). Last, at the updating step, GNN
updates the vector representation for each node vi via hil = update(mli·, hil-1), a function taking the

                                                           3
aggregated message and the representation of itself as inputs. Hidden representation of the last GNN
layer serves as the final node representation: zi = hLi , which is then used for downstream tasks, such
as node/graph classification and link prediction.

4 The PGExplainer

In this section, we introduce PGExplainer. Different from GNNExplainer which provides explanations
on both structure and features, PGExplainer focuses on explanation on graph structures because
feature explanation in GNNs is similar to that in non-graph neural networks, which has been
extensively studied in the literature [1, 19, 32, 39, 8, 14, 28]. PGExplainer is flexible and applicable
to interpret all kinds of GNNs. We start with the learning objective of PGExplainer (Section 4.1) and
then present the reparameterization strategy for efficient optimization (Section 4.2). In Section 4.3,
we specify particular instantiations to understand GNNs on node and graph classifications. Detailed
algorithms can be found in the Appendix.

4.1 The learning objective

The literature has shown that real-life graphs are with underling structures [35, 37]. To explain

predictions made by a GNN model, we divide the original input graph Go into two subgraphs:
Go = Gs + G, where Gs presents the underlying subgraph that makes important contributions
to GNN's predictions, which is the expected explanatory graph, and G consists of the remaining

task-irrelevant edges for predictions made by the GNN. Following [53], PGExplainer finds Gs by
maximizing the mutual information between the GNN's predictions and the underlying structure Gs:

                  max MI(Yo, Gs) = H(Yo) - H(Yo|G = Gs),                                  (1)
                   Gs

where Yo is the prediction of the GNN model with Go as the input. The mutual information quantifies
the probability of prediction Yo when the input graph to the GNN model is limited to the explanatory
graph Gs. The intuition behind comes from the traditional forward propagation based methods for
the whitebox explanation [8]. For example, if removing an edge (i, j) dramatically changes the
prediction in the GNN, then this edge is important and should be included in Gs. Otherwise, it can be
considered as irrelevant edge for the GNN model to make the prediction. Since H(Yo) is only related
to the GNN model whose parameters are fixed in the explanation stage, the objective is equivalent to
minimizing the conditional entropy H(Yo|G = Gs).

However, the direct optimization of the above objective function is intractable as there are 2M
candidates for Gs. Thus, we consider a relaxation by assuming that the explanatory graph is a Gilbert
random graph [15], where selections of edges from the original input graph Go are conditionally
independent to each other. Let eij  V × V be the binary variable indicating whether the edge is
selected, with eij = 1 if the edge (i, j) is selected, and 0 otherwise. Let G be the random graph
variable. Based on the above assumption, the probability of a graph G can be factorized as:

                                 P (G) = (i,j)E P (eij ).                                 (2)

A straightforward instantiation of P (eij) is the Bernoulli distribution eij  Bern(ij). P (eij =
1) = ij is the probability that edge (i, j) exists in G. With this relaxation, we thus can rewrite the
objective as:

min  H (Yo |G  =  Gs)  =    min  EGs [H(Yo|G  =  Gs)]    min  EGs q() [H (Yo |G  =  Gs)]  (3)

 Gs                          Gs                            

where q() is the distribution of the explanatory graph parameterized by 's.

4.2 The reparameterization trick

Due to the discrete nature of Gs, we relax edge weights from binary variables to continuous variables
in the range (0, 1) and adopt the reparameterization trick to efficiently optimize the objective function
with gradient-based methods [24]. We approximate the sampling process Gs  q() with a
determinant function of parameters , temperature  , and an independent random variable : Gs 
G^s = f(Go, , ). The temperature  is used to control the approximation. Here we utilize the

                                 4
Figure 2: Illustration of PGExplainer for explaining GNNs on graph classification. (1) The left part

demonstrates the explanation network. It takes node representations Z as well as the original graph

Go as inputs to compute , the latent variables in edge distributions. Edge distributions are severed as

the explanation. In case that an explanatory subgraph is wanted, we select top-ranked edges according
to latent variables . (2) A random graph G^s is sampled from edge distributions and then feed to the
trained GNN model to get the prediction Y^s. (3) Parameter  in the explanation network is optimized
with cross-entropy between the original prediction Yo and the updated prediction Y^s.

binary concrete distribution as the instantiation [36]. Specifically, the weight e^ij  (0, 1) of edge
(i, j) in G^s is calculated by:

                      Uniform(0, 1), e^ij = ((log - log(1 - ) + ij)/ ),                                (4)

where (·)is the Sigmoid function, and ij  R is the parameter. When   0, the weight

e^ij  is binarized with lim0 P (e^ij     =     1)  =    exp(ij )  )  .  Since P (eij  =  1)  =  ij, by choosing
                                                      1+exp(ij

ij    =  log   , ij  we    have  lim 0   G^s   =   Gs.  This demonstrates the rationality of using binary

              1-ij

concrete distribution to approximate the Bernoulli distribution. Moreover, with temperature  > 0,

the   objective  function  is  smoothed  with  a  well-defined  gradient   e^ij  .Thus,  with  reparameterization,
                                                                            ij

the objective in Eq. (3) becomes:

                                    min  E     Uniform(0,1)H (Yo|G      =  G^s)                        (5)

                                      

Considering efficient optimization, we follow [53] to modify the conditional entropy with cross-
entropy H(Yo, Y^s), where Y^s is the prediction of the GNN model with G^s as the input. With the
above relaxations, we adopt Monte Carlo to approximately optimize the objective function:

                                                            1     K     C
                                                        -
              min E Uniform(0,1)H(Yo, Y^s)  min                            P (Yo = c) log P (Y^s = c)
                                                           K
                                                                k=1 c=1
                                                                                                       (6)
                     1K          C
         =min -
                     K              P(Y = c|G = Go) log P(Y = c|G = G^(sk)),

                           k=1 c=1

where  denotes the parameters in the trained GNN, K is the total number of sampled graph, C is
the number of labels, and G^(sk) is the k-th sampled graph with Eq. (4), parameterized by .

4.3 Explanation of graph neural networks with a global view

Although explanations provided by the leading method GNNExplainer [53] preserve the local fidelity,
they do not help to understand the general picture of the model across a population [50]. Furthermore,
various GNN based models have been applied to analyze graph data with millions of instances [52],
the cost of applying local explanations one-by-one can be prohibitive with such large datasets in
practice. On the other hand, explanations with a global view of the model ascertain users' trust [39].
Furthermore, these models can generalize explanations to new instances without retraining, making it
more efficient to explain large scale datasets.

To have a global view of a GNN model, our method collectively explains predictions made by a
trained model on multiple instances. Instead of treating  in Eq. (6) as independent variables, we

                                                        5
utilize a parameterized network to learn to generate explanations from the trained GNN model, which
also applies to unexplained instances. In general, GNN based models first learn node representations
and then feed the vector representations to downstream tasks [21, 25, 45]. We denote these two
functions by GNNE0 (·) and GNNC1 (·), respectively. For GNNs without explicit classification
layers, we use the last layer instead. As a result, we can represent a GNN model with:

       Z = GNNE0 (Go, X), Y = GNNC1 (Z).                          (7)

Z is the matrix of node representations encoding both features and structure of the input graph, which
is used as an input in the explanation network to calculate the parameter :

                    = g(Go, Z).                                   (8)

 denotes parameters in the explanation network, which is shared by all edges among the population.
Therefore, PGExplainer can be utilized to collectively provide explanations for multiple instances.
Specifically, in the collective setting with instance set I, the objective of PGExplainer is:

       KC

min -              P(Y = c|G = Go(i)) log P(Y = c|G = G^s(i,k)),  (9)

       iI k=1 c=1

where G(i) is the input graph and G^s(i,k) is the k-th sampled graph with Eq. (4 ,8) for i-th instance.
We consider both graph and node classifications and specify an instantiation for each task. Solutions
for other tasks, such as link prediction, are similar and thus omitted.

Explanation network for node classification. Considering that explanations for nodes in a graph
may appear diverse structures [53], especially for nodes with different labels. For example, an edge
(i, j) is important for the prediction of node u, but not for another node v. Based on this motivation,
we implement the  = g(Go, Z) to explain the prediction of node v with:

                   ij = MLP([zi; zj; zv]).                        (10)

MLP is a multi-layer neural network parameterized with  and [·; ·] is the concatenation operation.

Explanation network for graph classification. For graph level tasks, each graph is considered as an
instance. The explanation of the prediction of a graph is not conditional to a specific node. Therefore,
we specify the  = g(Go, Z) for graph classification as:

                   ij = MLP([zi; zj]).                            (11)

With the graph classification as an example, the architecture of PGExplainer is shown in Figure 2.
The algorithms of PGExplainer for node and graph classification can be found in Appendix.

Computational complexity. PGExplainer is more efficient than GNNExplainer for two reasons.
First, PGExplainer learns a latent variable for each edge in the original input graph with a neural
network parameterized by , which is shared by all edges in the population of input graphs. Different
from GNNExplainer, whose parameter size is linear to the number of edges, the number of parameters
in PGExplainer is irrelevant to the size of the input graph, which makes PGExplainer applicable
to large scale datasets. Further, since the explanation is shared among a population, a trained
PGExplainer can be utilized in the inductive setting to explain new instances without retraining
the explainer. To explain a new instance with |E| edges in the input graph, the time complexity of
PGExplainer is O(|E|). As a comparison, GNNExplainer has to retrain for the new instance, leading
to the time complexity of O(T |E|), where T is the number of epochs for retraining.

4.4 Regularization

The framework of PGExplainer is flexible with various regularization terms to preserve desired
properties on the explanation. We now discuss the regularization terms as well as their principles.

Size and entropy constraints. Following [53], to obtain compact and succinct explanations, we
impose a constraint on the explanation size by adding ||||1, the l1 norm on latent variables , as a
regularization term. Besides, element-wise entropy is also be applied to further achieve discrete edge
weights [53].

                   6
Next, We provide more regularization terms that are compatible with PGExplainer. Note that for a fair
comparison, the following regularization terms are not utilized in experimental studies in Section 5.

Budget constraint. To obtain a compact explanation, the l1 norm on latent variables  is introduced,
which penalizes all edge weights to sparsify the explanatory graph. In cases that a predefined budget
B is available, for example, |Gs|  B, we could modify the size constraint to budget constraint:

Rb = ReLU(          e^ij - B).                                (12)

            (i,j)E

When the size of the explanatory graph is smaller than the budget B, the budget regularization Rb = 0.
On the other hand, it works similarly to the size constraint when out of budget.

Connectivity constraint. In many real-life scenarios, determinant motifs are expected to be con-
nected. Although it is claimed that GNNExplainer empirically tends to detect a small connected
subgraph, the explicit constraints are not provided [53]. We propose to implement the connected
constraint with the cross-entropy of adjacent edges, which connect to the same node. For instance,
(i, j) and (i, k) both connected to the node i. The motivation is that is (i, j) is selected in the the
explanatory graph, then its adjacent edge (i, k) should also be included. Formally, we design the
connectivity constraint as:

H(e^ij, e^ik) = -[(1 - e^ij) log(1 - e^ik) + e^ij log e^ik].  (13)

5 Experimental study

In this section, we evaluate our PGExplainer with a number of experiments. We first describe synthetic
and real-world datasets, baseline methods, and experimental setup. Then, we present the experimental
results on explanations of both node and graph classification. With qualitative and quantitative
evaluations, we demonstrate that our PGExplainer can improve the SOTA method up to 24.7% in
AUC on explaining graph classification. At the same time, with a trained explanation network, our
PGExplainer is significantly faster than the baseline when explaining unexplained instances. We also
provide extended experiments to show deep insights of PGExplainer in the appendix. The code and
data used in this work are available 2.

5.1 Datasets

We follow the setting in GNNExplainer and construct four kinds of node classification datasets,
BA-Shapes, BA-Community, Tree-Cycles, and Tree-Grids [53]. Furthermore, we also construct a
graph classification datasets, BA-2motifs. Illustration of synthetic datasets is shown in Table 2. (1)
BA-Shapes is a single graph consisting of a base Barabasi-Albert (BA) graph with 300 nodes and
80 "house"-structured motifs. These motifs are attached to randomly selected nodes from the BA
graph. After that, random edges are added to perturb the graph. Nodes features are not assigned in
BA-Shapes. Nodes in the base graph are labeled with 0; the ones locating at the top/middle/bottom
of the "house" are labeled with 1,2,3, respectively. (2) BA-Community dataset consists of two
BA-Shapes graphs. Two Gaussian distributions are utilized to sample node features, one for each
BA-Shapes graph. Nodes are labeled based on their structural roles and community memberships,
leading to 8 classes in total. (3) In the Tree-Cycles dataset, an 8-level balanced binary tree is adopted
as the base graph. A set of 80 six-node cycle motifs are attached to randomly selected nodes from the
base graph. (4) Tree-Grid is constructed in the same way as TREE-CYCLES, except that 3-by-3 grid
motifs are used to replace the cycle motifs. (5) For graph classification, we build the BA-2motifs
dataset of 800 graphs. We adopt the BA graphs as base graphs. Half graphs are attached with "house"
motifs and the rest are attached with five-node cycle motifs. Graphs are assigned to one of 2 classes
according to the type of attached motifs.

We also include a real-life dataset, MUTAG, for graph classification, which is also used in previous
work [53]. It consists of 4,337 molecule graphs. Each graph is assigned to one of 2 classes based on its
mutagenic effect [53, 40]. As discussed in [53, 9], carbon rings with chemical groups N H2 or N O2

    2https://github.com/flyingdoog/PGExplainer

                                                           7
are known to be mutagenic. We observe that carbon rings exist in both mutagen and nonmutagenic
graphs, which are not discriminative. Thus, we can treat carbon rings as the shared base graphs and
N H2, N O2 as motifs for the mutagen graphs. There are no explicit motifs for nonmutagenic ones.
Table 1 shows the statistics of synthetic and real-life datasets.

                           Table 1: Dataset statistics

                    Node Classification                  Graph Classification

         BA-Shapes  BA-Community Tree-Cycles  Tree-Grid  BA-2motifs  MUTAG
               1                                   1
#graphs      700    1      1                             1,000       4,337
#nodes                                          1,231
#edges      4,110   1,400  871                  3,410    25,000      131,488
#labels        4
                    8,920  1,950                   2     51,392      266,894

                    8      2                             2           2

5.2 Baselines and experimental setup

Baselines. We compare with the following baseline methods, GNNExplainer [53], a gradient-based
method (GRAD) [53], graph attention network (ATT) [45], and Gradient [38]. (1) GNNExplainer is a
post-hoc method providing explanations for every single instance. (2) GRAD learns weights of edges
by computing gradients of GNN's objective function w.r.t. the adjacency matrix. (3) ATT utilizes
self-attention layers to distinguish edge attention weights in the input graph. Each edge's importance
is obtained by averaging its attention weights across all attention layers. (4) We first adopt Gradient
in [38] to calculate the importance of each node, then calculate the importance of an edge by average
the connected nodes' importance scores.

Experimental setup. We follow the experimental settings in GNNExplainer [53]. Specifically, for
post-hoc methods including ATT, GNNExplainer, and PGExplainer, we first train a three-layer GNN
and then apply these methods to explain predictions made by the GNN. Since weights in attention
layers are jointly optimized with the GNN model in ATT, we thus train another GNN model with
self-attention layers. We follow [1] to tune temperature  . We refer readers to the Appendix for more
training details.

5.3 Results

The results of comparative evaluation experiments on both synthetic and real-life datasets are sum-
marized in Table 2. In these datasets, node/graph labels are determined by the motifs, which are
treated as ground truth explanations. These motifs are utilized to calculate explanation accuracy for
PGExplainer as well as other baselines.

Qualitative evaluation. We choose an instance for each dataset and visualize its explanations given
by GNNExplainer and PGExplainer in Table 2. In these explanations, bold black edges indicate
top-K edges ranked by their importance weights, where K is set to the number of edges inside
motifs for synthetic datasets and 10 for MUTAG [53]. As demonstrated in these figures, the whole
motifs, such as "house" in BA-Shapes and BA-Community, cycles in Tree-Cycles and BA-2motifs,
grids in Tree-Grid, and N O2 groups in MUTAG are correctly identified by PGExplainer. On the
other hand, some important edges are missing in the explanations given by GNNExplainer. For
example, the explanation provided by GNNExplainer for the instance in MUTAG contains the carbon
rings and part of a N O2 group. However, the carbon rings appear frequently in both mutagen and
nonmutagenic graphs, which are not discriminative. Conversely, PGExplainer correctly identifies
both N O2 groups.

Quantitative evaluation. We follow the experimental settings in GNNExplainer [53] and formalize
the explanation problem as a binary classification of edges. We treat edges inside motifs as positive
edges, and negative otherwise. Importance weights provided by explanation methods are considered
as prediction scores. A good explanation method assigns high weights to edges in the ground truth
motifs than the ones outside. AUC is adopted as the metric for quantitative evaluation. Especially,
for the MUTAG dataset, we only consider the mutagen graphs because no explicit motifs exist in
nonmutagenic ones. For PGExplainer, we repeat each experiment 10 times and report the average
AUC scores and standard deviations here.

From the table, we have the following observations. PGExplainer achieves SOTA performances
in all scenarios and the accuracy gains are up to 13.0% in node classification and 24.7% in graph

                                         8
                                  Node Classification                 Graph Classification
                         BA-Community Tree-Cycles
              BA-Shapes                                    Tree-Grid  BA-2motifs   MUTAG

Base

 Motifs       None       N (µl, l)     None                None       None         Atom types
Features                              Visualization

Explanations
by GNN-
Explainer

Explanations
  by PG-

Explainer

                                      Explanation AUC

GRAD          0.882           0.750   0.905                0.612           0.717        0.783
                              0.739                                       0.674        0.765
ATT           0.815                   0.824                0.667           0.773        0.653
                                 -                                        0.742        0.727
Gradient      -               0.836   -                    -          0.926±0.021  0.873±0.013
                         0.945±0.019                                      24.7%        11.5%
GNNExplainer 0.925           13.0%    0.948                0.875

PGExplainer 0.963±0.011               0.987±0.007 0.907±0.014

Improve       4.1%                    4.1%                 3.7%

GNNExplainer  650.60     696.61       Inference Time (ms)  713.40     934.72       409.98
PGExplainer   10.92      24.07             690.13           6.72      80.13         9.68
Speed-up       59x        29x               6.36            106x       12x          42x
                                            108x

Table 2: Illustration of different datasets together with performance evaluation of PGExplainer
and other baselines. BA-Shapes, BA-Community, Tree-Cycles, Tree-Grid are datasets for node
classification [53]. Node labels are represented by their colors. BA-2motifs and MUTAG datasets
are used for graph classification. Graphs with "house" motifs are labeled with 0 and the ones with
cycles are with 1 in BA-2motifs dataset. N H2, N O2 are treated as motifs of the mutagen graphs in
MUTAG. Explanations extracted by GNNExplainer and PGExplainer are also shown as case studies.

classification. Compared to GNNExplainer, which tackles instances independently thus can only
achieve suboptimal explanations, PGExplainer utilizes a parameterized explanation network based
upon graph generative model to collectively provide explanations for multiple instances. As a result,
PGExplainer can have a global view of the GNNs, which answers why PGExplainer can outperform
GNNExplainer by relatively large margins.

Efficiency evaluation. Explanation network in PGExplainer is shared across the population of
instances. Thus, a trained PGExplainer can be utilized to explain new instances in the inductive
setting. We denote the time to explain a new instance with a trained explanation method by inference
time. Since GNNExplainer has to retrain the model, we also count the training time here. The running
time comparison in Table 2 shows that PGExplainer can speed up the computation significantly, up
to 108 times faster than GNNExplainer, which makes PGExplainer more practical for large-scale
datasets.

Further experiments on the inductive performance and effects of regularization terms are in Appendix.

6 Conclusion

We present PGExplainer, a parameterized method to provide a global understanding of any GNN
models on arbitrary machine learning tasks by collectively explaining multiple instances. We
show that PGExplainer can leverage the representations produced by GNNs to learn the underlying
subgraphs that are important to the predictions made by GNNs. Furthermore, PGExplainer is more
efficient due to its capacity to explain GNNs in the inductive settings, which makes PGExplainer
more practical in real-life applications.

                                                           9
Acknowledgement

This project was partially supported by NSF projects IIS-1707548 and CBET-1638320.

Broader impact

Graph neural networks are powerful tools that have been applied in various real-world applications,
including community detection, recommendation systems, computer vision, and natural language
processing [3, 13, 30, 51]. Our work can not only provide interpretable explanations with local
fidelity for predictions made by GNN models, but also improve the global understanding of the
model.

There are several broader impacts of using our method to explain predictions made by GNNs. First,
our method can increase the transparency of applying GNNs for decision-critical applications, such
as drug discovery and diagnosis. As a result, our method can help alleviate safety, and fairness risks.
For example, as we show in our experiments, we could correctly identify motifs that have determinant
effects on the mutagenicity of molecules. On the other hand, our method also puts GNN models at a
high risk of being attacked. Our method extracts subgraphs that are important to GNNs' behaviors.
Disturbing these parts leads to significant changes in GNNs' predictions. Besides, increasing the
interpretability of GNNs may cause automation bias, such as an undue trust on GNN models.

References

 [1] Abubakar Abid, Muhammad Fatih Balin, and James Zou. Concrete autoencoders for differen-
      tiable feature selection and reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.09346, 2019.

 [2] Raman Arora and Jalaj Upadhyay. On differentially private graph sparsification and applications.
      In NeurIPS, pages 13378­13389, 2019.

 [3] Joan Bruna and X Li. Community detection with graph neural networks. Stat, 1050:27, 2017.

 [4] Joan Bruna, Wojciech Zaremba, Arthur Szlam, and Yann LeCun. Spectral networks and locally
      connected networks on graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6203, 2013.

 [5] Rich Caruana, Yin Lou, Johannes Gehrke, Paul Koch, Marc Sturm, and Noemie Elhadad.
      Intelligible models for healthcare: Predicting pneumonia risk and hospital 30-day readmission.
      In KDD, pages 1721­1730, 2015.

 [6] Jianbo Chen, Le Song, Martin J Wainwright, and Michael I Jordan. Learning to explain: An
      information-theoretic perspective on model interpretation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.07814,
      2018.

 [7] L Paul Chew. There are planar graphs almost as good as the complete graph. Journal of
      Computer and System Sciences, 39(2):205­219, 1989.

 [8] Piotr Dabkowski and Yarin Gal. Real time image saliency for black box classifiers. In NIPS,
      pages 6967­6976, 2017.

 [9] Asim Kumar Debnath, Rosa L Lopez de Compadre, Gargi Debnath, Alan J Shusterman, and
      Corwin Hansch. Structure-activity relationship of mutagenic aromatic and heteroaromatic
      nitro compounds. correlation with molecular orbital energies and hydrophobicity. Journal of
      medicinal chemistry, 34(2):786­797, 1991.

[10] Michaël Defferrard, Xavier Bresson, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Convolutional neural networks
      on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering. In NIPS, pages 3844­3852, 2016.

[11] P ERDdS and A R&wi. On random graphs i. Publ. Math. Debrecen, 6(290-297):18, 1959.

[12] D. Erhan, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent. Visualizing higher-layer features of a deep
      network. University of Montreal, 1341(3):1, 2019.

[13] Wenqi Fan, Yao Ma, Qing Li, Yuan He, Eric Zhao, Jiliang Tang, and Dawei Yin. Graph neural
      networks for social recommendation. In The Web Conference, pages 417­426, 2019.

[14] Ruth C Fong and Andrea Vedaldi. Interpretable explanations of black boxes by meaningful
      perturbation. In ICCV, pages 3429­3437, 2017.

                                                          10
[15] Edgar N Gilbert. Random graphs. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 30(4):1141­1144,
      1959.

[16] Justin Gilmer, Samuel S Schoenholz, Patrick F Riley, Oriol Vinyals, and George E Dahl. Neural
      message passing for quantum chemistry. In ICML, pages 1263­1272, 2017.

[17] Marco Gori, Gabriele Monfardini, and Franco Scarselli. A new model for learning in graph
      domains. In IJCNN, volume 2, pages 729­734. IEEE, 2005.

[18] Aditya Grover, Aaron Zweig, and Stefano Ermon. Graphite: Iterative generative modeling of
      graphs. In ICML, 2019.

[19] Wenbo Guo, Sui Huang, Yunzhe Tao, Xinyu Xing, and Lin Lin. Explaining deep learning
      models­a bayesian non-parametric approach. In NeurIPS, pages 4514­4524, 2018.

[20] Wenbo Guo, Dongliang Mu, Jun Xu, Purui Su, Gang Wang, and Xinyu Xing. Lemna: Explaining
      deep learning based security applications. In CCS, pages 364­379, 2018.

[21] Will Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large
      graphs. In NIPS, pages 1024­1034, 2017.

[22] Gecia Bravo Hermsdorff and Lee M Gunderson. A unifying framework for spectrum-preserving
      graph sparsification and coarsening. arXiv preprint arXiv:1902.09702, 2019.

[23] Peter D Hoff, Adrian E Raftery, and Mark S Handcock. Latent space approaches to social
      network analysis. Journal of the american Statistical association, 97(460):1090­1098, 2002.

[24] Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax.
      arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01144, 2016.

[25] Thomas N Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classification with graph convolutional
      networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907, 2016.

[26] Himabindu Lakkaraju, Ece Kamar, Rich Caruana, and Jure Leskovec. Interpretable & explorable
      approximations of black box models. CoRR, abs/1707.01154, 2017.

[27] Jure Leskovec, Jon Kleinberg, and Christos Faloutsos. Graphs over time: densification laws,
      shrinking diameters and possible explanations. In KDD, pages 177­187, 2005.

[28] Jiwei Li, Will Monroe, and Dan Jurafsky. Understanding neural networks through representation
      erasure. arXiv preprint arXiv:1612.08220, 2016.

[29] Ruoyu Li, Sheng Wang, Feiyun Zhu, and Junzhou Huang. Adaptive graph convolutional neural
      networks. In AAAI, 2018.

[30] Chundi Liu, Guangwei Yu, Maksims Volkovs, Cheng Chang, Himanshu Rai, Junwei Ma, and
      Satya Krishna Gorti. Guided similarity separation for image retrieval. In NeurIPS, pages
      1554­1564, 2019.

[31] Scott Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. NIPS,
      2017.

[32] Scott M Lundberg and Su-In Lee. A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. In
      NIPS, pages 4765­4774, 2017.

[33] Dongsheng Luo, Yuchen Bian, Yaowei Yan, Xiao Liu, Jun Huan, and Xiang Zhang. Local
      community detection in multiple networks. In KDD, 2020.

[34] Jianxin Ma, Peng Cui, Kun Kuang, Xin Wang, and Wenwu Zhu. Disentangled graph convolu-
      tional networks. In ICML, pages 4212­4221, 2019.

[35] Jiaqi Ma, Weijing Tang, Ji Zhu, and Qiaozhu Mei. A flexible generative framework for graph-
      based semi-supervised learning. In NeurIPS, pages 3276­3285, 2019.

[36] Chris J Maddison, Andriy Mnih, and Yee Whye Teh. The concrete distribution: A continuous
      relaxation of discrete random variables. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.00712, 2016.

[37] Mark Newman. Networks. Oxford university press, 2018.

[38] Phillip E Pope, Soheil Kolouri, Mohammad Rostami, Charles E Martin, and Heiko Hoffmann.
      Explainability methods for graph convolutional neural networks. In CVPR, 2019.

[39] Marco Tulio Ribeiro, Sameer Singh, and Carlos Guestrin. " why should i trust you?" explaining
      the predictions of any classifier. In KDD, pages 1135­1144, 2016.

                                                          11
[40] Kaspar Riesen and Horst Bunke. Iam graph database repository for graph based pattern
      recognition and machine learning. In Joint IAPR International Workshops on Statistical
      Techniques in Pattern Recognition (SPR) and Structural and Syntactic Pattern Recognition
      (SSPR), pages 287­297. Springer, 2008.

[41] Franco Scarselli, Marco Gori, Ah Chung Tsoi, Markus Hagenbuchner, and Gabriele Monfardini.
      The graph neural network model. IEEE TNN, 20(1):61­80, 2008.

[42] David I Shuman, Sunil K Narang, Pascal Frossard, Antonio Ortega, and Pierre Vandergheynst.
      The emerging field of signal processing on graphs: Extending high-dimensional data analysis to
      networks and other irregular domains. IEEE signal processing magazine, 30(3):83­98, 2013.

[43] Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Axiomatic attribution for deep networks.
      ICML, 2017.

[44] David C Van Essen, Stephen M Smith, Deanna M Barch, Timothy EJ Behrens, Essa Yacoub,
      Kamil Ugurbil, Wu-Minn HCP Consortium, et al. The wu-minn human connectome project: an
      overview. Neuroimage, 2013.

[45] Petar Velickovic´, Guillem Cucurull, Arantxa Casanova, Adriana Romero, Pietro Lio, and Yoshua
      Bengio. Graph attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903, 2017.

[46] Chi-Jen Wang, Seokjoo Chae, Leonid A Bunimovich, and Benjamin Z Webb. Uncover-
      ing hierarchical structure in social networks using isospectral reductions. arXiv preprint
      arXiv:1801.03385, 2017.

[47] Dongkuan Xu, Wei Cheng, Dongsheng Luo, Yameng Gu, Xiao Liu, Jingchao Ni, Bo Zong,
      Haifeng Chen, and Xiang Zhang. Adaptive neural network for node classification in dynamic
      networks. In ICDM, 2019.

[48] Dongkuan Xu, Wei Cheng, Dongsheng Luo, Xiao Liu, and Xiang Zhang. Spatio-temporal
      attentive rnn for node classification in temporal attributed graphs. In IJCAI, 2019.

[49] Keyulu Xu, Weihua Hu, Jure Leskovec, and Stefanie Jegelka. How powerful are graph neural
      networks? arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.00826, 2018.

[50] Chengliang Yang, Anand Rangarajan, and Sanjay Ranka. Global model interpretation via
      recursive partitioning. In HPCC, pages 1563­1570. IEEE, 2018.

[51] Liang Yao, Chengsheng Mao, and Yuan Luo. Graph convolutional networks for text classifica-
      tion. In AAAI, volume 33, pages 7370­7377, 2019.

[52] Rex Ying, Ruining He, Kaifeng Chen, Pong Eksombatchai, William L Hamilton, and Jure
      Leskovec. Graph convolutional neural networks for web-scale recommender systems. In KDD,
      pages 974­983, 2018.

[53] Zhitao Ying, Dylan Bourgeois, Jiaxuan You, Marinka Zitnik, and Jure Leskovec. Gnnexplainer:
      Generating explanations for graph neural networks. In NeurIPS, pages 9240­9251, 2019.

[54] Jiaxuan You, Rex Ying, Xiang Ren, William L Hamilton, and Jure Leskovec. Graphrnn:
      Generating realistic graphs with deep auto-regressive models. In ICML, 2018.

[55] Hao Yuan, Jiliang Tang, Xia Hu, and Shuiwang Ji. Xgnn: Towards model-level explanations of
      graph neural networks. In KDD, 2020.

[56] Muhan Zhang and Yixin Chen. Link prediction based on graph neural networks. In NeurIPS,
      pages 5165­5175, 2018.

                                                          12
     Supplementary Material: Parameterized Explainer for
                       Graph Neural Network

A. Explanation algorithms

The algorithms of PGExplainer for node and graph classification are shown in Algorithm 1 and 2,
respectively. We first discuss the node classification in Algorithm 1. In GNNs with message passing

Algorithm 1: Training algorithm for explaining node classification

1: Input: The input graph Go = (V, E), node features X, node labels Y , the set of instances to be explained

   I, a trained GNN model: GNNE0 (·) and GNNC1 (·).
2: for each node i  I do
3: Go(i)  extract the computation graph for node i.

4: Z(i)  GNNE0 (Go(i), X).
5: Yo(i)  GNNC1 (Z(i)).
6: end for

7: for each epoch do

8: for each node i  I do

9:     latent variables calculated with Eq. (10)

10:  for k  1 to K do
             G^s(i,k)  sampled from Eq. (4).
11:

12:          Y^s(i,k)  GNNC1 (GNNE0 (G^s(i,k), X))

13:  end for

14: end for

15: Compute loss with Eq. (9).

16: Update parameters  with backpropagation.

17: end for

mechanisms, the prediction at a node v is fully determined by its local computation graph, which is
defined by its L-hop neighborhoods [53]. L is the number of GNN layers. Thus, for each node i in
the instance set I to be explained, we first extract a local computation graph Go(i) (line 3). With Go(i)
as the input graph, the trained GNN model generates the label of node i, denoted by Yo(i) (line 4-5).
To train the explanation network, each time we select a node i and compute parameters  in edge
distributions with Eq. (10) (line 9). After that, we sample K graphs as input graphs for GNN to get
updated predictions for node i, with the k-th prediction denoted by Y^s(i,k) (line 11-13). We compute
the loss and update parameters  in the explanation network in line 15-16.

Algorithm 2: Training algorithm for explaining graph classification

1: Input: A set of input graphs with i-th graph represented by Go(i), node features X(i), and a label Y (i), a

   trained GNN model: GNNE0 (·) and GNNC1 (·).
2: for each graph Go(i) do

3: Z(i)  GNNE0 (Go(i), X(i)).
4: Yo(i)  GNNC1 (Z(i)).
5: end for

6: for each epoch do

7: for each graph Go(i) do

8:     latent variables calculated with Eq. (11)

9:   for k  1 to K do
             G^s(i,k)  sampled from Eq. (4).
10:

11:          Y^s(i,k)  GNNC1 (GNNE0 (G^s(i,k), X(i)))

12:  end for

13: end for

14: Compute loss with Eq. (9).

15: Update parameters  with backpropagation.

16: end for

                                              13
The training algorithm for explaining graph classification is shown in Algorithm 2. The algorithm

is similar to the one explaining node classifications, except that computation graphs are not used,
because, for graph classification, each graph is treated as an instance. Given a set of graphs {Go(i)}iI,
we first compute the node embeddings Z(i) and graph labels Yo(i) with the trained GNN model (line
2-4). In each epoch, for each i-th graph, we compute the parameters  in its edge distributions with
Eq. 11 (line 8). We then sample K subgraphs and get the updated predictions. We compute the loss
with Eq. (9) and update parameters  with backpropagation.

B. Hardware and implementations in experiments

All experiments are conducted on a Linux machine with an Nvidia GeForce RTX 2070 SUPER
GPU with 8GB memory. CUDA version is 10.2 and Driver Version is 440.64.00. PGExplainer
is implemented with Tensorflow 2.0.0. For each dataset, we first train a GNN model, which is
then shared by all posthoc methods ATT, GNNExplainer, and PGExplainer. We use FC(a, b, f ) to
denote a fully-connected layer. a and b are the numbers of input and output neurons respectively.
f is the activation function. Similarly, we denote a GNN layer with input dimension a, output
dimension b, and activation function f by GNN(a, b, f ). With these notations, the network structure
of the GNN model for node classification is GNN(10, 20, ReLU)-GNN(20, 20, ReLU)-GNN(20, 20,
ReLU)-FC(20, #label, softmax). For graph classification, we add a maxpooling layer to get graph
representations before the final FC layer. Thus, the network structure is GNN(10, 20, ReLU)-GNN(20,
20, ReLU)-GNN(20, 20, ReLU)-Maxpooling-FC(20, #label, softmax). We adopt the Adam optimizer
with the initial learning rate of 1.0 × 10-3. All variables are initialized with Xavier. We follow
GNNExplainer to split train/validation/test with 80/10/10% for all datasets. Each model is trained for
1000 epochs. The accuracy performances of GNN models are shown in Table 3. The results show
that the designed GNN models are powerful enough for node/graph classifications on both synthetic
and real-life datasets.

                    Table 3: Accuracy performance of GNN models

                    Node Classification                          Graph Classification

Accuracy BA-Shapes  BA-Community Tree-Cycles  Tree-Grid  BA-2motifs MUTAG
                                                 0.92
Training  0.98      0.99  0.99                   0.94            1.00  0.87
                                                 0.94
Validation 1.00     0.88  1.00                                   1.00  0.89

Testing   0.97      0.93  0.99                                   1.00  0.87

The network structure of explanation networks in PGExplainer is FC(#input, 64, ReLU)-FC(20,

1, Linear), which is shared for all datasets. #input is 60 for node classification, and 40 for graph

classification.To train PGExplainer, we also adopt the Adam optimizer with the initial learning rate of
3.0 × 10-3. The coefficient of size regularization is set to 0.05 and entropy regularization is 1.0. The
epoch T is set to 30 for all datasets. The temperature  in Eq. (4) is set with annealing schedule [1]:
 (t) = 0(T /0)t, where 0 and T are the initial and final temperatures. A small temperature tends
to generate more discrete graphs which may hinder the explanation network being optimized with
backpropagation. In this task, we find that relatively high temperatures work well in practice. 0 is
set to 5.0 and T is set to 2.0.

C. Additional experiments

In this part, we conduct extensive experiments to have deep insights into our PGExplainer.

C.1 Inductive performance

As we discussed in Section 4.3, the explanation network is shared across the population. Thus, with a
trained PGExplainer, we can directly infer the explanation without retraining the explanation network.
As a result, our PGExplainer has better generalization power than the leading baseline GNNExplainer.
Besides, our PGExplainer is more efficient in the inductive setting. In this section, we empirically
demonstrate the effectiveness of PGExplainer in the inductive setting. In the inductive setting, we
select  instances for training, (N - )/2 for validation, and the rest for testing.  is ranged from
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 30]. Note that, with  = 1, our method degenerates to the single-instance explanation

                                         14
method. Recall that to explain a set of instances, GNNExplainer first detects a reference node and
then computes the explanation for the reference node. The explanation is then generalized to other
nodes with graph alignment [53]. We claim that it may lead to sub-optimal explanations because
reference node selection and graph alignment are not jointly optimized with the explanation in an
end-to-end fashion. The AUC scores of PGExplainer are shown in Figure 3. We have the following
observations. 1) The testing AUC increase as more instances are trained, verifying the effectiveness
of PGExplainer. Some results are higher than the reported ones in Section 5 because here we adopt
validation datasets to fine-tune the hyper-parameters. 2) More training instances lead to smaller
standard deviation and PGExplainer tends to globally detect shared motifs with higher robustness.
3) PGExplainer can achieve relatively good performance with a small number of trained instances,
which makes PGExplainer more practical in large datasets. The results also explain why we dismiss
the training time of PGExplainer and only count the inference time in Section 5.

1                          1                                                                                        1
AUC
                                                      AUC

                                                                                                               AUC

0.98                                                              0.98

                           0.9

      STD                                 STD                     0.96                                                 STD
                                          mean
0.96  Mean                                                                                                             Mean

                           0.8

      1 2 3 4 5 30               1 2 3 4 5 30                                                                          1 2 3 4 5 30
                                                                                                                                 #Training instances
      #Training instances                 #Training instances

      (a) BA-Shapes                       (b) BA-Community                                                             (c) Tree-Cycles

      1                                           1

      AUC
                                                             AUC
                                                             0.8
      0.8

                            STD                   0.6              STD
                           Mean                                   Mean

      0.6                  2 3 4 5 30                             1 2 3 4 5 30
          1                  #Training instances                             #Training instances

                           (d) Tree-Grid                          (e) BA-2motifs

      Figure 3: Evaluation of PGExplainer in the inductive setting.

C.2 Effects of regularization terms

In this part, we analyze the effects of regularization terms. In addition to the size and entropy
regularizers introduced in GNNExplainer, we also have discussed regularization terms on budgets and
connectivity constraints. Since the first two regularizers are used in the quantitative evaluation, we
first conduct parameter studies. Visualization results on synthetic datasets show that the explanatory
graph extract by PGExplainer tends to be small and compact. To verify the effectiveness of the
proposed regularizer for connectivity constraint, we synthesize a noisy BA-Shapes dataset.

Effects of size and entropy constraint. We select synthetic datasets for parameter study. The
coefficients of size and entropy regularizers are denoted by s and e, respectively. AUC scores w.r.t
coefficients are shown in Figure 4. We observe that PGExplainer achieves competitive performances
even without any regularization terms in all datasets except the BA-Community, which verifies the
effectiveness of the model itself. For the BA-Community dataset, the entropy constraint plays an
important role.

Effects of connectivity constraint. To show the effect of the connectivity constraint on the explana-
tory graph, we build a noisy BA-Shapes dataset with 0.2N noisy edges. We vary the coefficient of the
connectivity regularization term c from 0 to 10 and apply PGExplainer to explain a single instance.

                                                          15
                                                                              0.97                                                                                                1                                                                                                       1

                                                                              0.969

                                                                              0.968                                                                                               0.9                                                                                                     0.9

1                                                                                          1                                                                                                  1

                                                                              0.967                                                                                               0.8                                                                                                     0.8

                                                                              0.966        0.9                                                                                                0.9

                                                                              0.965                                                                                               0.7                                                                                                     0.7

                                                                              0.964        0.8                                                                                                0.8

                                                                              0.963                                                                                               0.6                                                                                                     0.6

                                                                              0.962        0.7                                                                                    0.5         0.7                                                                                         0.5

AUC 0.9                                                                       0.961 AUC                                                                                                 AUC

                                                                              0.96         0.6                                                                                    0.4         0.6                                                                                         0.4

                                                                                           0.5                                                                                                0.5

                                                                        0                                                                                                      0                                                                                                  0
                                                                                           0.4                                                                                                0.4
                                                        0.01
                                                                                                                                                                        0.01                                                                                               0.01

0.8                                                             0.05                       0.3                                                                     0.05                       0.3                                                                                 0.05
   5.0                                                                                        5.0                                                                                                5.0
            1.0                                             0.1                                        1.0                                                     0.1                                        1.0                                                                 0.1
                    0.5                                              e                                         0.5                                                      e                                         0.5                                                                  e
                            0.1                                                                                        0.1                                                                                                0.1
                                                        0.5                                                                                                0.5                                                                                                            0.5

         s                       0.05              1.0                                                s                             0.05              1.0                                                s                             0.05                          1.0

                                       0.01                                                                                               0.01                                                                                                           0.01

                                             05.0                                                                                               05.0                                                                                                           05.0

         (a) BA-Shapes                                                                                (b) BA-Community                                                                                   (c) Tree-Cycles

                                                                                                                                    0.94                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                                    0.93
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.95

                                             1                                                                                      0.92        1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0.9
                                                                                                                                    0.91

                                                                                                                                    0.9                                                                                                0.85

                                             0.9                                                                                                0.9

                                                                                                                                    0.89

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.8

                                                                                                                                    0.88

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.75

                                       AUC 0.8                                                                                      0.87  AUC 0.8

                                                                                                                                    0.86                                                                                               0.7

                                             0.7                                                                                                0.7
                                                                                                                                 0                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                      0.01                                                                                               0.01

                                             0.6 5.0                                                          0.05                              0.6 5.0                                                          0.05
                                                         1.0                                                                                                1.0
                                                                 0.5                                      0.1                                                       0.5                                      0.1
                                                                         0.1                                       e                                                        0.1                                       e

                                                                                                      0.5                                                                                                0.5

                                                        s                     0.05               1.0                                                       s                      0.05              1.0

                                                                                     0.01                                                                                               0.01

                                                                                           05.0                                                                                               05.0

                                                        (d) Tree-Grid                                                                                      (e) BA-2motifs

                                                        Figure 4: Effects of size and entropy constraint

The visualization results with regard to different choices of coefficients are shown in Figure 5. The
figure demonstrates that without explicit constraint, PGExplainer may detect several connected edges
in the noisy input graph, although these edges are also inside motifs. With the connectivity constraint,
we observe that PGExplainer tends to provide a connected subgraph as an explanation.

            (a) c=0                                                                            (b) c=5                                                                                                                   (c) c=10
                                                                        Figure 5: Effects of connectivity constraint

                                                                                                                                         16
D. Selection of subset of features

In this paper, we focus on globally understanding predictions made by GNNs by providing topological
explanations. To explain node features, in GNNExplainer, the authors propose to use a feature mask
to select features that are important to preserve original predictions. Feature selection has been
extensively studied in non-graph neural networks and can be applied directly to explain GNNs, such
as the concrete autoencoder [1]. Besides, since the selected features are shared among instances
across the population, feature explanation is naturally global and applicable to new instances in the
inductive setting.

                                                          17
