arXiv:2303.09777v1 [physics.acc-ph] 17 Mar 2023  Multiplexed Photoinjector Optimization for
                                                 High-Repetition-Rate Free-Electron Lasers

                                                 Zhen Zhang , Yuantao Ding , Zhirong Huang and Feng Zhou
                                                 SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA
                                                 Correspondence*:
                                                 Zhen Zhang
                                                 zzhang@slac.stanford.edu

                                                 ABSTRACT

                                                  The multiplexing capabilities of superconducting X-ray free-electron lasers (FELs) have gained
                                                 much attention in recent years. The demanding requirements for photon properties from multiple
                                                 undulator lines necessitate more flexible beam manipulation techniques to achieve the goal of
                                                 "beam on demand". In this paper, we investigate a multiplexed configuration for the photoinjector
                                                 of high-repetition-rate FELs that aims to simultaneously provide low-emittance electron beams of
                                                 different charges. A parallel, multi-objective genetic algorithm is implemented for the photoinjector
                                                 parameter optimization. The proposed configuration could drastically enhance the flexibility of
                                                 beam manipulation to improve multiplexing capabilities and realize the full potential of the facility.

                                                 Keywords: free-electron laser, beam on demand, multiplexing capability, photoinjector, VHF gun, genetic algorithm

                                                 1 INTRODUCTION

                                                 Recently there is increasing interest in the multiplexing capabilities of high-repetition-rate X-ray free-
                                                 electron lasers (FELs) across the community as the development of superconducting radio-frequency
                                                 (SRF) linac based FEL facilities such as LCLS-II [Raubenheimer et al. (2015)] and its high energy
                                                 upgrade [Raubenheimer et al. (2018)], SHINE [Zhu et al. (2017)] and European XFEL [Decking et al.
                                                 (2020)]. The high-repetition rate of electron beams up to megahertz (MHz) in these facilities make it
                                                 feasible to feed multiple undulator lines simultaneously, significantly increasing the user experiment time.
                                                 The concept of generating bunches with different properties to drive more than one FELs in parallel
                                                 has been already done both at superconducting FELs [Faatz et al. (2016); Fro¨hlich et al. (2019)] and
                                                 normal conducting FELs [Paraliev et al. (2022)]. However, the wide range of photon property requirements
                                                 from multiple undulator lines presents a major challenge for satisfying these requirements with a single
                                                 photoinjector and SRF linac.

                                                   To achieve the full potential of high-repetition-rate FEL facilities such as LCLS-II, the concept of "beam
                                                 on demand" has been proposed to provide tailored beam properties for each undulator line at the desired
                                                 repetition rate [Zhang et al. (2021)]. These properties include, but are not limited to, beam current, bunch
                                                 length, beam charge, beam energy, and energy chirp. To achieve shot-by-shot control of bunch length
                                                 and peak current, a continuous-wave (CW) normal conducting cavity, called a "chirper", which is located
                                                 upstream of the first magnetic chicane, has been proposed and studied [Nasr et al. (2016); Zhang et al.
                                                 (2023)]. Different methods have been explored to produce the desired beam energy for each beamline
                                                 from a single SRF linac, such as using an achromatic and isochronous electron delay system and fast
                                                 kickers [Yan and Deng (2019)] or off-frequency detuning in SRF cavities [Zhang et al. (2019)]. Laser heater
                                                 shaping allows for customized shaping of the beam's slice energy spread, resulting in various beam current
                                                 profiles for different applications [Marinelli et al. (2016); Roussel et al. (2015); Cesar et al. (2021)]. It's

                                                                                                                                                                                          1
Zhang et al.

worth noting that all these techniques are performed after the photoinjector and assume consistent beam
properties at the photoinjector exit for all shots.

  The photoinjector is the low energy ( 100 MeV) part of the accelerator, where space charge effects and
non-relativistic kinematics play an critical and even dominant role. The photoinjector is usually optimized
for a specific beam charge, but changing the beam charge requires re-optimization of the entire injector
settings. To achieve the goal of "beam charge on demand", a multiplexed configuration for photoinjector is
needed to preserve low emittance for different beam charges at the same time. Due to the intensity of space
charge, most of the parameters in the photoinjector are nonlinearly coupled. In this paper, a simulation
code, ASTRA, which has been extensively tested against experiments and other codes [Flottmann (1997)],
is used to model the beam dynamics in the photoinjector. A multi-objective genetic optimizer based on the
continuous non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II) [Deb et al. (2002)] is used for the parameter
optimizations of photoinjector. NSGA-II is a popular evolutionary algorithm that is widely used in various
fields, including engineering, finance, and computer science. NSGA-II can handle multiple objectives
and constraints simultaneously, and can effectively generate a set of Pareto-optimal solutions, which are
the optimal solutions that cannot be improved in one objective without worsening another objective. The
choice of population size in NSGA-II algorithm depends on several factors, including the complexity of
the problem, the number of objectives, and the available computational resources. A larger population
size can lead to better diversity in the population, which can improve the convergence and quality of the
optimization results. However, a larger population size also requires more computational resources and
longer computation time. This method has been widely adopted in the field of accelerator during the last
decades [Bazarov and Sinclair (2005); Hajima and Nagai (2006); Hofler et al. (2013); Papadopoulos et al.
(2014); Chen et al. (2022); Zhu et al. (2022); Neveu et al. (2023)]. In this study, the population size of each
generation is set to be 128, taking into account the decision variables of photoinjector optimization and the
available computational resources.

  The paper is structured as follows: in Sec. 2, we will present the optimized results of the LCLS-
II photoinjector for three typical beam charges as a baseline. The method to optimize multiplexed
configurations is described in Sec. 3, including the optimal results of three multiplexed configurations with
different customized knobs. Finally, in Sec. 4, we provide some discussion and concluding remarks.

2 BASELINE OF LCLS-II PHOTOINJECTOR

To illustrate the proposed multiplexed configuration for the photoinjector, we first show the optimization
results for different beam charges individually optimized with the same input variables, serving as the
facility's baseline. We use the photoinjector of LCLS-II as an example in the following simulations, which
is depicted in Figure 1. The photoinjector consists primarily of a very-high-frequency (VHF) gun, two
solenoids (labeled SOL1 and SOL2), a 2-cell normal conducting continuous-wave 1.3 GHz buncher cavity,
and eight 9-cell 1.3 GHz cavities (labeled 1 to 8). The RF gun is a replica of the APEX [Sannibale et al.
(2012)] gun developed at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, which allows LCLS-II to operate in
continuous-wave mode with an electron beam repetition rate of 1 MHz. The drive laser used for generating
electrons at the Cs2Te cathode is an ultraviolet laser at 257.5 nm, a fourth harmonic from an infrared laser
operating at 1030 nm [Gilevich et al. (2020)]. The longitudinal profile of the laser pulse can have either a
Gaussian or uniform distribution. The implementation of the latter relies on successful laser pulse shaping to
suppress any initial density modulation, as failure to do so may introduce a strong microbunching instability
in the accelerator [Huang et al. (2004)] In this study, we assume a uniform transverse and longitudinal laser
density profile. The laser spot radius and pulse duration are also considered as optimization variables. The

Frontiers     2
Zhang et al.

maximum gradient of the gun is fixed at 20 MV/m in the simulations, equivalent to a maximum beam energy
of 750 keV. The gradient of the buncher cavity is also fixed to produce a maximum energy gain of 200 keV.
Both the gun and buncher's relative acceleration phases are optimization variables. The two solenoids
are utilized to control the beam size along the photoinjector and implement the emittance compensation
technique [Carlsten (1989); Serafini and Rosenzweig (1997)]. For the downstream cryomodule, the first
three cavities are considered as optimization variables, while the others are set to be on-crest acceleration
with a fixed gradient.

  A high brightness electron beam at the exit of the photoinjector is a crucial requirement. This is typically
measured by the transverse emittance and the bunch length, which have an inverse relationship. Minimizing
both of these parameters in the optimization process typically results in a "Pareto front," which represents
the minimum possible transverse emittance for a given bunch length. Aside from these two objectives,
other constraints must also be considered to ensure that the results are feasible. These include the total
beam energy and projected energy spread, which must be within acceptable limits for the downstream
laser heater. For high-repetition rate FELs, it is also important to consider higher-order (>2) correlated
energy spread, as it can lead to current horns after beam compression. In this study, we focus on optimizing
the transverse emittance and bunch length as our two main objectives. We maintain cylindrical symmetry
throughout the photoinjector, so only the horizontal emittance ( nx) was used as our metric for transverse
emittance. Other constraints will be examined to ensure they fall within reasonable limits.

  In our simulations, the mean transverse energy (MTE) of electrons at cathode emission is 330 meV, which
corresponds to an initial intrinsic emittance of 0.8 mm-mrad/mm (also known as thermal emittance). This
estimate of the intrinsic emittance is considered to be conservative and reasonable for Cs2Te cathodes.
To balance the computational resources and accuracy, we use 10,000 macro particles in each simulation
run with ASTRA, and a grid of 25 by 50 in the radial and longitudinal directions, respectively. Once
the optimization has converged, we select one of the optimized solutions from the Pareto front and run
it again with higher accuracy, using 200,000 particles and a grid of 75 by 125 to minimize numerical
errors. Notably, we have observed good agreement between simulations with both low and high numbers
of particles, with differences being negligible for our study.

  The variables and constants used in the simulation of the LCLS-II photoinjector are listed in Table,1. The
drive laser pulse is assumed to have a uniform radial shape and density profile in the transverse direction.
Previous optimization work has shown that the gradient of the second cavity (CAV-2) in the cryomodule is
very low (<5 MV/m) for emittance compensation [Mitchell et al. (2016),Neveu and Ding (2020)], and is
purposely turned off during LCLS-II commissioning. For simplicity, we also assume on-crest acceleration
with fixed gradient from CAV-4 to CAV-8, as these cavities have little effect on the beam emittance and
bunch length. During the machine operation, the phases and amplitudes of these cavities can be further
adjusted to correct the beam energy and correlated energy spread based on the measurements.

  In this study, we explore the performance of the LCLS-II photoinjector for three different beam charges:
100 pC, 50 pC, and 20 pC. To find the optimal combination of transverse emittance and bunch length, we
conduct two-objective optimizations for each of these beam charges. The results are displayed in Figure,2,
which shows the Pareto fronts of the two objectives for each beam charge. The Pareto fronts are obtained
after 150 generations with 128 samples per generation. As a result of the optimizations, the following
values of transverse emittance and bunch length are selected as baseline solutions: 0.22 µm at z = 0.8 mm
for 100 pC, 0.15 µm at z = 0.5 mm for 50 pC, and 0.10 µm at z = 0.3 mm for 20 pC. These solutions
will be used as the reference points for following optimizations of the multiplexed configuration. We note
that while the Pareto fronts in Figure 2 suggest that shorter bunch lengths can be achieved with a slight

Frontiers     3
Zhang et al.

increase in emittance, shorter bunch lengths can also lead to stronger high-order energy chirp on the beam
due to space charge force, which may ultimately degrade beam properties after downstream compression.
As such, we prioritize selecting a reasonable range for the bunch length, rather than choosing the shortest
possible value.

3 MULTIPLEXED CONFIGURATION FOR LCLS-II PHOTOINJECTOR

The objective of the multiplexed configuration for photoinjector is to produce high-brightness electron
beams with different beam charges (100 pC, 50 pC and 20 pC) alternatively at high repetition rate. To
achieve this goal, certain settings in the photoinjector must remain constant for all beam charges, such
as the field of the solenoid and the gradient of the RF cavities. The most challenging task in this work
is to preserve low emittance for all charges with limited knobs. To simplify the optimization and reduce
the number of objectives, the bunch lengths of different charges are specified at specific values and the
emittance is minimized. A loss function Lq is defined for a given beam charge q as

           Lq = nx + max(abs(z - z(q)) - rq, 0) ×  ,   (1)

where nx is the value of emittance in unit of µm and z is the rms bunch length in unit of mm. When
the bunch length is within the range of z(q) ± rq, the loss function is exactly the value of emittance. 
is a regularization parameter to control the penalty when bunch length is out of the desired range. In our
simulations, we choose  = 2. These loss functions of different beam charges are used as objectives in
optimizations. In this work, we consider two groups of target bunch lengths: (I) 1.0±0.1 mm for 100 pC,
0.8±0.1 mm for 50 pC, 0.6±0.1 mm for 20 pC; (II) 0.8±0.1 mm for 100 pC, 0.5±0.075 mm for 50 pC,
0.3±0.05 mm for 20 pC.

  In the multiplexed configuration of the photoinjector, several parameters associated with magnetic and
RF fields must remain constant for all beam charges. However, other parameters, primarily those related to
the drive laser pulse, can be adjusted as needed for different charges. These adjustable parameters include
the laser spot size at the cathode, laser pulse duration, and laser injection time. Our preliminary studies
have shown that the laser injection time is not a significant knob in preserving the emittance. This can
be attributed to the fact that the wavelength of the VHF gun is much longer than that of the downstream
RF cavities and the laser pulse duration, and thus, adjusting the laser injection time within a reasonable
range for the downstream RF cavities does not significantly affect the space charge effect in the low-energy
electron beam, i.e., the emittance compensation process. In this work, we consider three cases: (A) no
customization of parameters, i.e., all variables in Table .1 are adjusted together and kept the same for the
3 bunch charges; (B) customization of the laser spot size, allowing the laser spot size as a free variable
for each charge while keeping all other variables the same for the three charges; and (C) customization of
laser pulse duration, which is similar with (B) but allowing the laser pulse duration as a free variable for
each charge. The optimal solutions will be compared with the results obtained in the previous section for
individual configurations.

  Figure 3 displays the distribution of the three loss functions during the optimization of the multiplexed
configuration with a customized laser spot size. The color map represents the sum of the three loss functions.
The optimization process converges after approximately 200 generations, and the optimal solution, with
the minimum sum of the three loss functions, is indicated in the figure by a blue cross.

Frontiers                                              4
Zhang et al.

  For a given desired bunch length range (e.g., group I), the emittance distribution for each of the two
beam charges for the three cases is shown in Figure 4. A clear "Pareto front" between the emittances
of each pair of beam charges can be observed. In each configuration, the optimal solution is chosen to
minimize the sum of emittances, as indicated by a red cross in the figure. The detailed bunch lengths and
emittances of these three configurations are listed in Table 2. Both configurations with a customized knob
perform better than the one without any knobs. The multiplexed configuration with a customized laser spot
size (case B) outperforms the other two configurations, with a total increase of around 9% in the sum of
emittances, compared to the baseline individually optimized configurations for each beam charge. The
emittances of the 50 pC and 20 pC beams remained almost the same as the baseline. The performance of the
configuration with a customized laser pulse duration (case C) is not as good as that of case B, but it is still
much better than the one without any customizations (case A). For different bunch length combinations,
the total emittance increase of the multiplexed configuration may vary, but it is crucial that they remain
within a reasonable range for facility operation.

  From these three cases, we can see that a solution of a unified injector configuration working for all the
three bunch charges can be found. If the laser parameters can be varied, the laser spot size is the most
effective knob for optimizing the multiplexed configuration. Among the two desired bunch length ranges,
the multiplexed configuration performs better for group I, which suggests that choosing an appropriate
desired bunch length range can further reduce the increase in emittance in the multiplexed configuration.

  In the multiplexed configuration with customized laser spot size (Figure 4-B), the optimal laser spot
radius for 100 pC, 50 pC and 20 pC are found to be 0.29 mm, 0.21 mm, and 0.12 mm, respectively. The
results show that the ratio of the square of the laser spot radius to the beam charge is nearly constant,
meaning that the laser spot size is adjusted to keep the same charge density near the cathode emission, thus
preserving emittance. This is a significant finding as it implies that the multiplexed configuration can be
easily adapted to other beam charges beyond the three beam charges used in the optimization study.

  For the optimal settings of case B in group I, the evolution of the emittance and the rms bunch length,
as well as the electric and solenoid fields, are displayed in Figure 5. The emittance reaches its minimum
value just before being frozen at high beam energy, and the rms bunch length stays constant after CAV-1.
Although there is some correlated energy chirp on the beam at the end of the injector if all the last 5 cavities
are set at on-crest acceleration, it can be removed by shifting their acceleration phase by approximately
6 degrees. The longitudinal phase space of three beams and their current and energy profiles are shown
in Figure 6. It can be observed that the average beam energy and arrival time of these three beams are
very close, a result of the same acceleration phases of all RF cavities and the same laser pulse duration.
Different beam charges may result in different wakefields along the SRF linac and therefore different
beam compression in the downstream chicane compressors, but this can be adjusted shot-by-shot using the
proposed chirper cavity for LCLS-II and its high energy upgrade [Zhang et al. (2023)].

4 DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

In this study, we investigated the possibility of multiplexed configurations for the photoinjector of SRF-
based FELs to deliver low-emittance electron beams with different beam charges at high repetition
rates. We evaluated three different configurations, two of them with a different customization of the
drive laser system for different beam charges. Our results showed that the laser spot size, which can be
technically customizable for each beam charge, was the most effective factor in preserving beam emittance.
Additionally, we found that maintaining the same charge density on the cathode by adjusting the laser

Frontiers     5
Zhang et al.

spot size made it possible to apply the optimized multiplexed configuration to other beam charges. The
implementation of these multiplexed configurations in the photoinjector of SRF-based FELs will enable
the delivery of beam charges on demand for each individual beamline, thus maximizing the multiplexing
capabilities of the facilities.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

Z.Z., Y.D., Z.H. and F.Z. contributed to conception and design of the study. Z.Z. performed the simulations
and the statistical analysis. Z.Z. and Y.D. wrote the first draft of the manuscript. Z.Z., Y.D., Z.H. and F.Z.
contributed to the manuscript revision. All authors approved the publication of the content.

FUNDING

This work was supported by U.S. Department of Energy Contract No. DE-AC02-76SF00515.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank Jingyi Tang and Christopher Mayes from SLAC for their valuable help and
discussions on the optimizations of photoinjector with genetic algorithm.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT

Data will be made available on request.

REFERENCES

Bazarov, I. V. and Sinclair, C. K. (2005). Multivariate optimization of a high brightness dc gun photoinjector.
  Physical Review Special Topics-Accelerators and Beams 8, 034202

Carlsten, B. E. (1989). New photoelectric injector design for the los alamos national laboratory xuv
   fel accelerator. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators,
  Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 285, 313­319

Cesar, D., Anakru, A., Carbajo, S., Duris, J., Franz, P., Li, S., et al. (2021). Electron beam shaping via laser
   heater temporal shaping. Physical Review Accelerators and Beams 24, 110703

Chen, H., Zheng, L.-M., Gao, B., Li, Z.-Z., Du, Y.-C., Li, R.-K., et al. (2022). Beam dynamics optimization
   of very-high-frequency gun photoinjector. Nuclear Science and Techniques 33, 116

Deb, K., Pratap, A., Agarwal, S., and Meyarivan, T. (2002). A fast and elitist multiobjective genetic
   algorithm: Nsga-ii. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation 6, 182­197

Decking, W., Abeghyan, S., Abramian, P., Abramsky, A., Aguirre, A., Albrecht, C., et al. (2020). A
   mhz-repetition-rate hard x-ray free-electron laser driven by a superconducting linear accelerator. Nature
   photonics 14, 391­397

Faatz, B., Plo¨njes, E., Ackermann, S., Agababyan, A., Asgekar, V., Ayvazyan, V., et al. (2016).
   Simultaneous operation of two soft x-ray free-electron lasers driven by one linear accelerator. New
  Journal of physics 18, 062002

Flottmann, K. (1997). ASTRA: A space charge tracking algorithm. Tech. rep.
Fro¨hlich, L., Aghababyan, A., Balandin, V., Beutner, B., Brinker, F., Decking, W., et al. (2019). Multi-

   beamline operation at the european xfel. In Proceedings of the International Free-Electron Laser
  Conference (FEL'19), Hamburg, Germany. 26­30

Frontiers     6
Zhang et al.

Gilevich, S., Alverson, S., Carbajo, S., Droste, S., Edstrom, S., Fry, A., et al. (2020). The lcls-ii
  photo-injector drive laser system. In 2020 Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics (CLEO) (IEEE),
  1­2

Hajima, R. and Nagai, R. (2006). Multiparameter optimization of an erl injector. Nuclear Instruments
  and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated
  Equipment 557, 103­105

Hofler, A., Terzic´, B., Kramer, M., Zvezdin, A., Morozov, V., Roblin, Y., et al. (2013). Innovative
  applications of genetic algorithms to problems in accelerator physics. Physical Review Special Topics-
  Accelerators and Beams 16, 010101

Huang, Z., Borland, M., Emma, P., Wu, J., Limborg, C., Stupakov, G., et al. (2004). Suppression of
  microbunching instability in the linac coherent light source. Physical Review Special Topics-Accelerators
  and Beams 7, 074401

Marinelli, A., Coffee, R., Vetter, S., Hering, P., West, G., Gilevich, S., et al. (2016). Optical shaping of
  x-ray free-electron lasers. Physical review letters 116, 254801

Mitchell, C., Emma, P., Qian, H., Qiang, J., Raubenheimer, T., Sannibale, F., et al. (2016). Rf injector
  beam dynamics optimization and injected beam energy constraints for lcls-ii. In Proc. 7th Int. Particle
  Accelerator Conf.(IPAC'16). 1699­1702

Nasr, M. H., Emma, P. J., Tantawi, S., et al. (2016). A cw normal conducting rf cavity for fast chirp control
  in the lcls-ii. In 7th Int. Particle Accelerator Conf.(IPAC'16), Busan, Korea, May 8-13, 2016 (JACOW,
  Geneva, Switzerland), 1817­1819

Neveu, N., Chang, T. H., Franz, P., Hudson, S., and Larson, J. (2023). Comparison of multiobjective
  optimization methods for the lcls-ii photoinjector. Computer Physics Communications 283, 108566

Neveu, N. and Ding, Y. (2020). LCLS-II standard configuration with a Gaussian-profile injector laser.
  Tech. rep., Technical Report LCLS-II-TN-20-03. SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory.

Papadopoulos, C., Emma, P., Filippetto, D., Raubenheimer, T., Sannibale, F., Schmerge, J., et al. (2014).
  Rf injector beam dynamics optimization for lcls-ii. FEL2014, Basel, August

Paraliev, M., Alarcon, A., Arsov, V., Bettoni, S., Biffiger, R., Boll, M., et al. (2022). Swissfel double bunch
  operation. Physical Review Accelerators and Beams 25, 120701

Raubenheimer, T. et al. (2015). Lcls-ii final design report. technical report. In SLAC Technical Report. No.
  LCLSII- 1.1-DR-0251-R0 (SLAC National Acclerator Laboratory)

Raubenheimer, T. et al. (2018). The lcls-ii-he, a high energy upgrade of the lcls-ii. In 60th ICFA Advanced
  Beam Dynamics Workshop on Future Light Sources (FLS'18), Shanghai, China, 5-9 March 2018
  (JACOW Publishing, Geneva, Switzerland), 6­11

Roussel, E., Ferrari, E., Allaria, E., Penco, G., Di Mitri, S., Veronese, M., et al. (2015). Multicolor
  high-gain free-electron laser driven by seeded microbunching instability. Physical review letters 115,
  214801

Sannibale, F., Filippetto, D., Papadopoulos, C., Staples, J., Wells, R., Bailey, B., et al. (2012). Advanced
  photoinjector experiment photogun commissioning results. Physical Review Special Topics-Accelerators
  and Beams 15, 103501

Serafini, L. and Rosenzweig, J. B. (1997). Envelope analysis of intense relativistic quasilaminar beams in
  rf photoinjectors: ma theory of emittance compensation. Physical Review E 55, 7565

Yan, J. and Deng, H. (2019). Multi-beam-energy operation for the continuous-wave x-ray free electron
  laser. Physical Review Accelerators and Beams 22, 090701

Frontiers     7
Zhang et al.

Zhang, Z., Ding, Y., Adolphsen, C., and Raubenheimer, T. (2019). Multienergy operation analysis in a
  superconducting linac based on off-frequency detune method. Physical Review Accelerators and Beams
  22, 110702

Zhang, Z., Ding, Y., Huang, Z., et al. (2021). Beam on demand for high-repetition-rate x-ray free-electron
  lasers. In 12th International Particle Accelerator Conference (IPAC'21), Campinas, SP, Brazil, 24-28
  May 2021 (JACOW Publishing, Geneva, Switzerland), 3995­3998

Zhang, Z., Snively, E., Dolgashev, V., and Huang, Z. (2023). Fast and flexible control of beam longitudinal
  phase space for high-repetition-rate x-ray free-electron lasers. To be published

Zhu, Z., Gu, D., Yan, J., Wang, Z., Yang, H., Zhang, M., et al. (2022). Inhibition of current-spike formation
  based on longitudinal phase space manipulation for high-repetition-rate x-ray fel. Nuclear Instruments
  and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated
  Equipment 1026, 166172

Zhu, Z., Zhao, Z., Wang, D., Liu, Z., Li, R., Yin, L., et al. (2017). Sclf: An 8-gev cw scrf linac-based x-ray
  fel facility in shanghai. Proceedings of the FEL2017, Santa Fe, NM, USA , 20­25

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Figure 1. A schematic layout of the VHF gun photoinjector for LCLS-II.

Frontiers  8
Zhang et al.

Figure 2. Pareto fronts of transverse emittance nx and rms bunch length z for individual configurations
with different beam charges.

Table 1. Optimization variables and constants in the LCLS-II photoinjector.

           Variable / Constant                                         Value               Unit
                                                                                           /
           Laser transverse distribution                               radial uniform      mm
           Laser spot radius                                           0.1  1              /
           Laser longitudinal distribution                             uniform
           Laser pulse duration (rms1)                                                     ps
           Beam charge                                                 5  24               pC
           VHF gun gradient                                            100 / 50 / 20       MV/m
                                                                       20                  degree 2
                                                                                           MV/m
           VHF gun off-crest phase                                     -30  30             degree
           Buncher cavity gradient                                     1.8
           Buncher cavity off-crest phase                              -120  -40           MV/m
           CAV-1 and CAV-3 peak gradient3                                                  degree
           CAV-1 and CAV-3 off-crest phase                             10  32 or turn off  /
                                                                       -60  40             MV/m
                                                                                           degree
           CAV-2                                                       Turn off            T
                                                                                           T
           CAV-4 to CAV-8 peak gradient                                32

           CAV-4 to CAV-8 off-crest phase                              0

           SOL1 B peak field                                           0.05  0.065

           SOL2 B peak field                                           0.02  0.04

                                                              
           1 RMS width equals full width divided by 12 in uniform distribution.

           2 All phases are based on the corresponding RF wavelength.

           3 Average gradient of CM cavity equals peak gradient divided by 1.93.

Frontiers                                                                                            9
Zhang et al.

Figure 3. Loss function Lq distribution of three beam charges of the last 40 generations in the optimization
of multiplexed configuration with customized laser spot size. The color map means the sum of three loss

functions. The blue cross represents the optimal point with minimum sum of loss functions.

Table 2. Electron bunch length and the corresponding optimal emittance of three beam charges in the
baseline and three multiplexed configurations. Case (A) no customization of parameters for the 3 bunch
charges; case (B) customization of the laser spot size for each charge; and case (C) customization of laser
pulse duration for each charge. Details see the text.

Group No. Parameter Unit   Baseline  Case A  Case B  Case C

              100-pC z mm  1.00      1.08    1.10    1.06
                           0.80      0.87    0.80    0.83
              50-pC z mm   0.60      0.58    0.55    0.69
                           0.20      0.46    0.24    0.30
              20-pC z mm   0.15      0.27    0.15    0.16
                           0.10      0.29    0.10    0.16
I             100-pC n µm  0.45      1.02    0.49    0.62

              50-pC n µm   0.80      0.83    0.86    0.72
                           0.50      0.55    0.58    0.55
              20-pC n µm   0.30      0.29    0.33    0.35
              sum of n µm  0.21      0.33    0.28    0.36
                           0.15      0.38    0.17    0.20
              100-pC z mm  0.10      0.33    0.12    0.18
                           0.46      1.04    0.57    0.74
              50-pC z mm
              20-pC z mm

II            100-pC n µm

              50-pC n µm
              20-pC n µm

              sum of n µm

Frontiers                                                    10
Zhang et al.

Figure 4. Distribution of beam emittance between 100 pC and 50 pC (left column), 100 pC and 20 pC
(right column) in the multiplexed configuration. The desired rms bunch length is 1.0±0.1 mm for 100 pC,
0.8±0.1 mm for 50 pC and 0.6±0.1 mm for 20 pC, respectively, in the loss functions. (Top) case A: no
customized knob. (Middle) case B: customized laser spot size. (Bottom): case C: customized laser pulse
duration. The red cross represents the optimal point with minimum sum of the emittance of three beam
charges in each configuration.

Frontiers     11
Zhang et al.

Figure 5. Electric and solenoid field (top), normalized emittance (middle) and rms bunch length (bottom)
of three beam charges in the multiplexed configuration with customized laser spot size (case B in group I).

Figure 6. Longitudinal phase space of electron beams at the exit of photoinjector of three beam charges in
the multiplexed configuration with customized laser spot size (case B in group I). To distinguish between
each beam, we used a different color map for density representation, which is not shown in the figure.

Frontiers     12
