                                              On the Use of Relative Validity Indices for Comparing Clustering
                                                                              Approaches

                                                            Luke W. Yerbury, Ricardo J.G.B. Campello, G. C. Livingston Jr,
                                                                                Mark Goldsworthy, Lachlan O'Neil

arXiv:2404.10351v2 [stat.ML] 21 Nov 2024                                                                              Abstract

                                              Relative Validity Indices (RVIs) such as the Silhouette Width Criterion, Calinski-Harabasz and Davies Bouldin
                                              indices are the most widely used tools for evaluating and optimising clustering outcomes. Traditionally, their ability
                                              to rank collections of candidate dataset partitions has been used to guide the selection of the number of clusters,
                                              and to compare partitions from different clustering algorithms. However, there is a growing trend in the literature
                                              to use RVIs when selecting a Similarity Paradigm (SP) for clustering -- the combination of normalisation procedure,
                                              representation method, and distance measure which affects the computation of object dissimilarities used in clustering.
                                              Despite the growing prevalence of this practice, there has been no empirical or theoretical investigation into the
                                              suitability of RVIs for this purpose. Moreover, since RVIs are computed using object dissimilarities, it remains
                                              unclear how they would need to be implemented for fair comparisons of different SPs.

                                                  This study presents the first comprehensive investigation into the reliability of RVIs for SP selection. We con-
                                              ducted extensive experiments with seven popular RVIs on over 2.7 million clustering partitions of synthetic and
                                              real-world datasets, encompassing feature-vector and time-series data. We identified fundamental conceptual limita-
                                              tions undermining the use of RVIs for SP selection, and our empirical findings confirmed this predicted unsuitability.
                                              Among our recommendations, we suggest instead that practitioners select SPs by using external validation on high
                                              quality labelled datasets or carefully designed outcome-oriented objective criteria, both of which should be informed
                                              by careful consideration of dataset characteristics, and domain requirements. Our findings have important implica-
                                              tions for clustering methodology and evaluation, suggesting the need for more rigorous approaches to SP selection in
                                              clustering applications.

                                          Nomenclature

                                          AMI Adjusted Mutual Information       DBI  Davies-Bouldin Index      MSM Move-Split-Merge
                                                                                DI   Dunn's Index
                                          ARI Adjusted Rand Index               DTW  Dynamic Time Warping      PCA Principal Component Analysis
                                                                                ED   Euclidean Distance
                                          AUCC Area Under Curve for Clustering  EM   Expectation-Maximisation  RVI Relative Validity Index
                                                                                EVI  External Validity Index
                                          BD Braycurtis Distance                HMM  Hidden Markov Model       SBD Shape-Based Distance
                                                                                MD   Manhattan Distance
                                          CaD Canberra Distance                 MDS  Multidimensional Scaling  SP  Similarity Paradigm

                                          CD/CoD Cosine Distance                                               SWC Silhouette Width Criterion

                                          ChD Chebyshev Distance                                               TWED Time Warping Edit Distance

                                          CHI Calinski-Harabasz Index

                                          CI  C-Index

                                          1 Introduction

                                          Clustering is a ubiquitous data mining technique with the aim of assembling the objects from a dataset into groups
                                          [4, 57]. An effective clustering partitions a dataset such that objects within groups will share a greater notion of similarity
                                          or homogeneity than objects in different groups. Such partitions are sought for a variety of purposes across a breadth of
                                          domains [116], which has resulted in a vast array of clustering approaches and components ranging from the generic to
                                          the highly task-specific. Broadly speaking, a majority of clustering approaches can be disassembled into five fundamental
                                          components: a data normalisation procedure, a data representation method, a distance measure, a clustering algorithm
                                          and a prototype definition [74, 75, 7, 5, 176, 24]. A prototype definition may be enforced within a subroutine of a
                                          clustering algorithm, or as an optional data abstraction post-clustering to compactly represent clusters. These five
                                          components should be selected carefully when designing candidate clustering approaches for particular domains and
                                          applications, as it is widely accepted that all five can bear significant influence on final clustering outcomes. As the
                                          normalisation procedure, representation method and distance measure all directly influence the pairwise similarities
                                          between objects in the dataset, one combination of these components in this paper is collectively referred to as a
                                          Similarity Paradigm (SP).

                                              Due to the unsupervised nature of clustering, there is no way of knowing a priori which combination of clustering
                                          components from the extensive literature will most aptly capture the unknown categories in a dataset, and no single
                                          combination could be expected to prove superior across many different datasets or domains [169]. Thus the resulting
                                          component selection problem is a daunting task, and has been approached in various ways throughout the literature. An

                                                                                                                        1
understandable reaction to the difficulty of this problem is to select components based on precedents and defaults in the
domain and wider clustering literature. This is a common and self-perpetuating system which is unlikely to be optimal
in general. At the very least, consideration of domain knowledge and application aims is recommended for reducing the
pool of candidate components [64]. Whilst concepts such as cluster stability [97] and various domain-specific, outcome-
targeted tools (such as forecast error [94]) have been applied sporadically, it seems that cluster components tend to be
selected by optimising Relative Validity Indices (RVIs).

    Whilst the concept of a cluster may differ between distinct contexts, most RVIs attempt to quantify and juxtapose
generally desirable notions of clusters, such as compactness or "high similarity" within groups, and separation or "high
dissimilarity" between groups. Popular RVIs include the Silhouette Width Criterion (SWC) [129], the Davies-Bouldin
Index (DBI) [38], Dunn's Index (DI) [46] and the Calinski-Harabasz Index (CHI) [27]. RVIs, according to their individual
notions of quality, can be used to rank a set of candidate partitions, and subsequently select the best partition. These
capabilities have frequently been used to infer the ideal number of clusters (k) for a dataset, referred to hereon as the
k-selection task. This application aligns with the original purpose of the vast majority of RVIs. It is a small leap to
consider that other model selection problems could also be approached using RVIs, such as selecting the ideal SP for
clustering a dataset, which we refer to as the SP-selection task. However, as far as the authors are aware, no RVIs have
been proposed, or shown to be suitable for SP-selection, despite widespread use for this purpose.

    The computation of RVIs typically requires a pairwise distance matrix at the very least. Both classic and more
contemporary RVIs have overwhelmingly been introduced within the context of feature-vector data embedded in a
Euclidean space, using the Euclidean distance (or L2-norm) as the default distance measure. Examples in the literature
suggest it is reasonable to change this default measure for RVI computations where the data are incompatible, such
as when mining communities in networks [123]. Indeed, the authors of the CHI acknowledge that there may be good
reasons to use other distance functions, even if they are not defined in terms of the inner products of Euclidean spaces1.
This precedent suggests it is likely reasonable to rank and select the best partition out of a collection of candidates by
computing an RVI using the same non-Euclidean distance or SP that was employed for clustering.

    Now supposing it were reasonable to use RVIs for SP-selection, it is unclear whether each partition should be
evaluated using the same SP applied to obtain the partition (hereafter referred to as the "matching-SP" evaluation
scheme), or whether a single SP should be maintained for all of the partitions (hereafter referred to as the "fixed-SP"
evaluation scheme). Where papers have compared partitions obtained via non-Euclidean paradigms, it is exceedingly
rare for them to indicate which of these two options was enforced when computing the RVIs. In [63], [107] and [151] it was
suggested that the same distance measure should be used for evaluation that was used for clustering. This approach is
supported by a conjecture in [94] that a fixed evaluation paradigm would likely show a bias towards partitions that were
produced with the same or similar paradigms. In an attempt to avoid this theorised bias, the authors of [94] proposed a
combinatorial scheme inspired by [73], where all combinations of RVI and clustering SP were considered simultaneously
for evaluation. All combinations were analysed via a heatmap in [94], whereas the unique RVIs in [73] cast votes for
the best SP. These approaches are highly sensitive to the set of candidate SPs, and are more complicated to interpret.
Nonetheless, inspired by this cross-test concept, in this paper we considered a third combinatorial evaluation scheme:
the arithmetic mean over all candidate fixed schemes (hereafter referred to as the "mean-SP" evaluation scheme).

   The main goal of the current paper was to determine whether the continued use of RVIs for selecting an optimal SP
should be recommended. This was achieved by investigating the following three fundamental questions:

  (i) Do RVIs equipped with a fixed-SP evaluation scheme demonstrate an observable bias towards partitions generated
       from clustering approaches employing the same SP?

  (ii) Is there a difference in reliability between the fixed-SP, matching-SP and mean-SP evaluation schemes for either
       of the SP- or k-selection tasks?

 (iii) Are RVIs as reliable for SP-selection as they are for their conventional application of k-selection?

Our primary contribution addresses these three questions via extensive experimental investigations, involving two com-
plementary methodologies applied to more than 2.7 million clustering partitions across three diverse batteries of bench-
mark datasets. This empirical work is complemented by several additional contributions:

    ­ a detailed examination of theoretical issues surrounding RVI use for SP-selection;

    ­ introducing a comprehensive nomenclature for uniquely describing clustering approaches by their components;

    ­ a thorough review of recent literature where RVIs have been applied for SP-selection;

    ­ perspectives on the use of RVIs for the SP-selection task from recent novel RVIs, as well as popular software
       packages with RVI implementations;

    ­ practical recommendations for SP-selection in clustering applications, including recommendations for alternatives.

    1However, it should not be expected that the mathematical or statistical properties of an RVI will still hold if it is instead computed with
an SP or prototype definition other than that with which the properties were derived.

                                                                              2
    The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 introduces critical background information and reviews
the relevant literature. Section 3 discusses in more depth the issues associated with using RVIs for SP-selection. Section 4
describes our experimental methodology and Section 5 presents our results. These findings will be discussed in Section 6,
including a review of alternative approaches to the problem of SP-selection. Finally, Section 7 will conclude the paper.

2 Background and Literature Review

Understanding the suitability of RVIs for SP-selection first requires examining three key areas: their current usage
in research literature, their implementations in software packages, and their theoretical development through both
traditional and novel indices. To begin Section 2, Section 2.1 establishes a comprehensive nomenclature for discussing
clustering approaches, disambiguating key terminology used throughout the remainder of the paper. Section 2.2 then
reviews recent literature applying RVIs for SP-selection, and Section 2.3 discusses RVI implementation details from
popular software packages. Section 2.4 introduces the popular RVIs chosen for our experiments and examines their
intended scope and purpose. Finally, Section 2.5 provides a similar analysis of more recent novel RVIs.

2.1 The Components of a Clustering Approach

As mentioned previously, surveys suggest that a considerable number of clustering procedures, techniques or methods
can be decomposed into five core clustering components, namely a data normalisation procedure, a data representa-
tion method, a distance measure, a clustering algorithm and a prototype definition. A single combination of these is
collectively referred to within this paper as a clustering approach (see Figure 1).

    Normalisation of data prior to clustering has long been recognised to have an impact on clustering outcomes, and
even deemed essential for generating meaningful clusters [86, 125]. The way that normalisation procedures are applied
largely depends on the data type. For feature vector clustering, normalisation is usually performed independently
to each feature across all objects to produce comparable values. This ensures that the clustering isn't dominated
by larger features. For time series, normalisation is often applied independently to the individual objects, as this
serves to direct attention toward the shapes of the time series, rather than their amplitudes when clustering. Several
normalisation procedures have been suggested [159, 119], and the most common methods are z-normalisation, which
results in normalised values having zero mean and unit variance; min-max normalisation, which scales values to range
between zero and one; and unit-norm normalisation, which ensures the Lp vector norm of the normalised values evaluates
to one.

    Representation method is a catch-all term for any feature-extraction method or transformation of the raw data
objects which is intended to improve clustering outcomes. An effective representation should emphasise characteristics
that are most relevant or informative for grouping. Furthermore, representations are critical for dimensionality reduction
in the context of large-scale data, where they moderate the influence of noise and improve the computational efficiency
of a clustering approach [7, 164]. Representations are the most domain-specific clustering component, and along with
specialist distance measures are often utilised specifically to make complicated data types compatible with the wealth
of existing feature-vector clustering tools. Some examples of representation methods include Bidirectional Encoder
Representation from Transformers for text data [142], Discrete Wavelet Transform for time series [111], autoencoder
features for images [172] or Principal Component Analysis for gene micro-array data [81]. Depending on the method,
normalisation can be performed before and/or after the representation has been applied to the data.

    A distance measure is a function of two data objects which quantifies their "sameness". They are required for the
vast majority of clustering algorithms, and representation methods typically specify a subset of compatible measures.
Popular distance measures such as the Euclidean Distance (ED) and Manhattan Distance (MD) [4] can be applied across
a swathe of different data types and representations, while others are more specific, such as MINDIST for the Symbolic
Aggregate Approximation (SAX) [96] or Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) for raw time series [18]. Some measures satisfy
all of the properties of a mathematical metric including non-negativity, identity of indiscernibles, symmetry, and triangle
inequality. These properties can be leveraged to increase computational efficiency [93], but partial violations of them
can introduce fruitful flexibility, allowing measures to feature invariances which have significant utility for more complex
data types [43, 118]. A distinction should be recognised between similarity and dissimilarity measures, with each term
conveying how large values of the measure are to be interpreted. Similarity measures yield larger values for more similar
objects (0 for minimally similar objects), while dissimilarity measures yield larger values for less similar objects (0 for
maximally similar objects). All distance measures used in this paper are formulated as dissimilarity measures; thus from
hereon the terms will be used interchangeably.

    Together, a normalisation procedure, representation method and distance measure determine a unique spatial em-
bedding of a set of data objects, dictating how the objects are positioned relative to one another. Changing any of
these components would fundamentally alter the pairwise relationships between objects. One combination of these
three components is referred to in this paper as a similarity paradigm or SP. It should also be recognised that different
parameter settings of one distance measure or representation also demarcate unique SPs. A well-designed SP will be
capable of identifying groups in a dataset which na¨ive SPs may be oblivious to (see Section 3). These three components
of an SP are collected with the remaining two in Figure 1 for a generic clustering approach.

    A clustering algorithm is a procedure which utilises a given SP to produce a partition between a set of objects,
where objects placed in the same group are more similar than objects separated into different groups. The obtained

                                                                              3
      Normalisation             Clustering  Evaluation
        Procedure               Algorithm     Scheme

Raw   Representation  Distance  Prototype   Partition   RVI
Data      Method      Measure   Definition

      Similarity Paradigm                     Cluster
                                            Prototypes
                      Clustering Approach

                                        Legend: Optional Input/Output User Controlled

Figure 1: Diagram of a clustering approach with its five constituent components. A prototype definition is applied within some
clustering algorithms, and is also required for producing cluster prototypes for some RVIs or various downstream purposes.
Evaluation with an RVI requires the user to select whether the evaluation SP is independent of, or matches the SP used to
produce the partition. These are referred to as fixed and matching evaluation schemes respectively.

partitions are typically hard or crisp, indicating that each object belongs to a single cluster, though partial cluster
membership can be obtained by calling upon fuzzy clustering algorithms [4] or probabilistic clustering algorithms such
as Expectation Maximisation (EM) [45] with Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) [101]. Different algorithms typically
optimise some local or global objective function which enforces or is informed by a particular concept or model of a
cluster. For instance, the perennially popular k-means [4] with ED optimises the Sum of Squared Errors (SSE), which
enforces a spherical or globular cluster model. Common threads of cluster models have been used to categorise clustering
algorithms into connectivity-based (e.g. agglomerative or divisive hierarchical clustering [130]), prototype-based (e.g.
k-means or k-medoids [4]), model-based (e.g. EM), density-based (e.g. DBSCAN [58] or OPTICS [9]), graph-based (e.g.
Louvain or Leiden [150]) or grid-based (e.g. STING [163] or WaveCluster [135]) algorithms [7], though some algorithms
defy singular categorisation (e.g. HDBSCAN* [28], which is both density- and connectivity-based). Note that with
this nomenclature, clustering with GMMs or Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) [4] employs the same EM clustering
"algorithm", but applies two different representations.

    Prototype definitions serve to optimally represent or summarise the constituents of a group of objects. They are
commonly utilised post-clustering for visualisations, summary purposes or as exemplars for downstream applications.
They are not explicitly required for most clustering approaches, but are involved within subroutines of some clustering
algorithms. Commonly encountered prototypes are revealed in the set of "k-prototypes" algorithms for continuous
feature vectors: k-means, k-medians, and k-medoids. As the clustering steps are virtually identical in these three exam-
ples, they can effectively be viewed as variants of a single k-prototypes clustering "algorithm" [124]. Many applications
benefit from the prototype being an instance from the dataset, as is enforced by the medoid definition. This prevents
pathological cases such as prototypes located "outside" of the cluster, or excessive smoothing. In some situations, the
choice of prototype hinges upon the selected representation or distance measure, for which the commonly employed mean
and median may not be appropriate. For example, the standard mean is insufficient to represent a set of time series
that have been clustered together with DTW since points are not consistently aligned during distance computation,
necessitating specialised approaches like DTW barycenter averaging [114, 120]. Though sometimes used interchangeably
with "prototype", we have reserved the term "centroid" to refer to some sort of average value according to a norm (e.g.
mean for L2, and median for L1 norms).

    Certainly there are some clustering approaches which do not atomise completely into all five of these components.
As mentioned previously, clustering with HMMs can be viewed as an application of the EM clustering algorithm to a
HMM representation of sequences. Any normalisation or prototype definition can be incorporated into this clustering
approach, but no distance measure is required or explicitly specified. Regardless, adoption of this nomenclature within
the literature is recommended for accurate and coherent communication in clustering applications or proposals for
new clustering tools. For instance, the six "distance measures" compared in [84] are more accurately described as six
representation methods and a single distance measure, namely ED. In [59], hierarchical clustering algorithms equipped
with different distance measures are described as "different clustering algorithms", which is used to justify the comparison
of different distance measures with RVIs. This nomenclature also makes the modular nature of clustering approaches
apparent, suggesting that components can be combined in potentially useful ways, or that particular components could
be isolated and applied in other machine learning tasks such as indexing, classification or anomaly detection.

2.2 Literature Review: Comparison of Similarity Paradigms with RVIs

Table 1 collects instances from the literature where different SPs have been selected or compared using RVIs. Our intent
is not to criticise these studies, but rather to document the widespread use of this intuitively appealing practice. The
collected papers were primarily case-studies of clustering applications or comparative studies. As evidenced in Table 1,

                                                                              4
Ref. Year Comp.a RVIsb                  Use                                              Data Description

[59] 2023 D             SWC             Comparison of distances                          Consumer Preference Data

[91] 2023 N             SWC, DBI, CHI   Comparison of normalisations                     Music Feature Data

[2]     2022 R          SWC             Comparison of representations                    Transaction Data

[47] 2022 R             SWC             Comparison of representations                    Energy Time Series

[177] 2021 D            SWC             Tuning novel distance parameters                 General Time Series

[126]   2021   R        SWC, DBI, CHI,  Comparison of representations                    Recommender System Data
[162]   2021   R        DI              (Values from 42 RVIs presented in appendix)      Spatiotemporal Trajectories
[52]    2021   R, D     SWC, DBI, CHI   Tuning novel representation parameters and       Multi-omics Data
                                        comparison of representations
                        SWC             Comparison of representations

[1]     2021 D          SWC             Comparison of distances                          Transaction Data

[83] 2021 D             SWC             Comparison of distances                          General Feature Data

[131] 2020 D            SWC             Comparison of distances                          Energy Time Series

[23] 2020 D             SWC             Comparison supporting proposed distance          Spatial Climate Data

[87]    2020   R, D     SWC, DI         Comparison of distances based on raw and         Energy Time Series
[152]   2020   R        SWC, DBI, CHI   transformed time series                          Energy Time Series
                                        Comparison of representations

[134] 2020 R            SWC             Comparison of representations                    Energy Time Series

[89] 2020      R        SWC, DBI, CHI,  Comparison of representations                    Medical Feature Data
               N        BHI, HLI                                                         Energy Time Series
[149],  2020,  N, R     SWC, DBI, MIA   Comparison of clustering approach combinations   Energy Time Series
[148]   2019                            via a combined index
[173]   2019            SWC             Comparison of representations

[6]     2019 D          DBI             Comparison of distances                          Medical Feature Data

[107] 2019 D            CSI             Comparison of distances                          Spatiotemporal Trajectories

[151] 2019 R            SWC             Comparison of aggregation functions and          Energy Time Series
[13] 2018 D                             aggregation levels                               Consumer Questionnaire Data
[60] 2017 D             SWC, DBI, DI,   Comparison of distances                          High-Dimensional Feature Data
                        XBI
                        CHI             Comparison supporting proposed distance

[136] 2017 D            SWC             Comparison of distances                          General Proportional Data

[3]     2016 D          SWC, DBI, XBI,  Multiobjective optimisation criterion for        Gene Expression Data
                        PBM, FCM        automatic selection and comparison of distances  Metabolic Pathways Data
[88] 2016 D             SWC, DI         Comparison of distances

[99]    2016   D        CHI, MHG, IGV   Tuning proposed distance parameter with          General Time Series
[144]   2015                            transformed indices                              General Feature Data
[166]   2013   D        SWC, DBI, CHI,  Comparison of distances                          Energy Time Series
[167]   2013   N, R, D  GDI, PBM, CNI                                                    Gene and Feature Data
               N, D     SWC, DBI, CHI,  Comparison of 6,992 combinations of distances,
                        DI, MIA         normalisations and representations
                        SWC, BHI, HLI   Comparison of clustering approach combinations

[10] 2011 R             SWC             Variable Selection                               Production Feature Data

[8]     2008 D          SWC             Comparison of distances                          Bioinformatics

[84] 2001 N, R          SWC             Comparison of representations                    ARIMA Time Series

a Distance Measure (D), Normalisation Procedure (N), Representation Method (R)
b Baker-Hubert Index (BHI), Calinski-Harabasz Index (CHI), Chou-Su Index (CSI), Connectivity Index (CNI), Davies-Bouldin Index
(DBI), Dunn Index (DI), Fuzzy C-Means Objective Function (FCM), Generalised Dunn Index (GDI), Hubert-Levine Index (HLI),
Intra-Group Variance (IGV), Mean Index Adequacy (MIA), Modified Hubert's Gamma (MHG), Pakhira-Bandyopadhyay-Maulik Index
(PBM), Silhouette Width Criterion (SWC), Xie-Beni Index (XBI)

Table 1: This table summarises a selection of instances where RVIs have been used to compare partitions obtained from
different SPs. The columns include the reference, year, compared clustering component, RVI used for the comparison,
additional comparison details, and a description of the involved data.

this comparative philosophy has been applied across a broad range of disciplines and seems to have become accepted
as commonplace. This broad adoption of RVIs for SP comparison has occurred despite the lack of any theoretical
justification for such use. The current study provides a much-needed rigorous evaluation.

    It should also be pointed out that while some studies relied upon a single RVI to compare different SPs (with the
SWC index being particularly prevalent), better studies used multiple RVIs, or incorporated other comparative methods
(such as those discussed in Section 6). This use of multiple RVIs follows recommendations established in numerous
comparative studies [154, 11, 76, 78]. This practice acknowledges the "no free lunch" principle [169], where each RVI's
strengths in certain scenarios are balanced by weaknesses in others.

2.3 Popular Software Implementations

Table 2 collects the many packages and toolkits targeting clustering evaluation and RVI computation across three
popular data analysis languages - , Python and Matlab. Among these, only Matlab's evalclusters function
explicitly addresses the choice of evaluation scheme in its documentation, stating that the evaluation distance measure
"must match the distance metric used in the clustering algorithm to obtain meaningful results." For the majority of

                                             5
                               Automatic Comparisona

Ref. Toolkit       Language RVIs Function    k A N R D Evaluation                                              Notes
                                                                                 Paradigm

[53] genieclust Python 23      --            ----------  Default                           Partitions produced externally, doesn't accept

                                                                                           a distance matrix.

[14] clusterCrit   R       28  --            ----------  Default                           Partitions produced externally, doesn't accept

                                                                                           a distance matrix.

[19] Clusters-     Python 40   --            ----------  Default                           Partitions produced externally, doesn't accept
         Features
                                                                                           a distance matrix.
[115] clv
                   R       8   --            -- -- -- -- -- Flexible (S) Partitions produced externally and can either

                                                                                           specify one of 3 distances or provide a distance

                                                                                           matrix for evaluation.

[30] fcvalid       R       18  --            -- -- -- -- -- Default (NS) Partitions produced externally by ppclust
[41] cclust
                                                                                           package with one of 18 distances.

                   R       14  --            -- -- -- -- -- Default (NS) Partitions produced externally by "cclust"

                                                                                           function (from flexclust package) with one of

                                                                                           2 distance measures.

[82] CVIK          Matlab 28   evalcvi()     -- -- -- -- Default (NS)                      Partitions produced internally or externally.
                                                                                           Features 2 evolutionary algorithms optimising a
                                                                                           single requested RVI. User can select one com-
                                                                                           bination from 3 algorithms (5 hierarchical link-
                                                                                           ages) and 6 distances.

[100] evalclusters Matlab  4 evalclusters()  -- -- -- -- Matching (S)                      Partitions produced internally. User can select
                                                                                           one combination from 3 algorithms (2 hierar-
                                                                                           chical linkages) and 7 distances.

[160] CVAP         Matlab 14   Graphical     -- -- -- -- Matching (NS)                     Partitions produced internally or externally.
                               Interface                                                   User can select one combination from 5 algo-
                                                                                           rithms (3 hierarchical linkages) and 2 distances.

[145] clusteval    Python  3   clusteval()   -- -- -- -- Default (S)                       Partitions produced internally. User can select
                                                                                           one combination from 4 algorithms (7 hierar-
                                                                                           chical linkages) and 22 scikit-learn distances.

[32] NbClust       R       30  NbClust()     -- -- -- -- Matching (NS)                     Partitions produced internally. User can select
                                                                                           one combination from 2 algorithms (8 hierar-
                                                                                           chical linkages) and 6 built-in distances (or can
                                                                                           provide distance matrix).

[26] clValid       R       3   clValid()     -- -- -- Matching (NS)                        Partitions produced internally or externally.
                                                                                           User can select combinations of 10 algorithms
                                                                                           (4 hierarchical linkages) and one of 3 distances.

[15] validclust Python     5 ValidClust()    -- -- -- Default (NS)                         Partitions produced internally. User can select
                                                                                           one combination from 1 algorithm (4 hierarchi-
                                                                                           cal linkages) and 5 distances.

[158], clusterSim  R       6 cluster.Sim()       --      Matching (NS) Partitions produced internally or externally.

[159]                                                                                      Automatic selection between combinations of

                                                                                           11 normalisations, 10 distances and 3 algo-

                                                                                           rithms (7 hierarchical linkages).

[170] autocluster Python   3 AutoCluster()   --          -- Matching (NS) Partitions are produced internally. Automatic

                                                                                           selection between combinations of 10 algo-

                                                                                           rithms (4 hierarchical linkages) and 7 represen-

                                                                                           tations.

a Number of Clusters (k), Clustering Algorithm (A), Normalisation Procedure (N), Representation Method (R) and Distance Measure (D)

Table 2: Packages and toolboxes from three popular data analysis languages targeting clustering evaluation. The first
four columns provide the reference, toolkit name, coding language and the number of RVIs implemented in the toolkit.
The automatic comparison column indicates which clustering components the toolkit facilitates the automatic selection,
recommendation or comparison of where such a function is offered. The next column indicates whether the package
implements a matching evaluation scheme or if the default Euclidean distance is used with the provided data (which may
be transformed/normalised). The brackets in this column indicate whether this was specified (S) or not specified (NS) in
the documentation. In case of the latter, the choice has been inferred by investigating the source code. The notes column
provides further details about the package, such as the number of built-in clustering algorithms, distance measures, etc.
Additionally, it is noted whether the package offers functionality to evaluate partitions produced "internally" within its
own functions, and/or partitions produced "externally" by other means.

other packages, determining whether RVIs were computed using matching-SP or fixed-SP schemes required meticulous
examination of source code, as this crucial detail was often omitted from documentation.

    The surveyed packages fall into two main categories. Six packages focus solely on RVI computation without built-in
clustering capabilities. Of these, most default to a fixed Euclidean evaluation scheme, with only clv offering flexibility
in distance measure choice. The remaining nine packages provide both clustering and evaluation capabilities, with a
majority (6) using matching evaluation schemes.

    While all surveyed packages with clustering capabilities allow optimisation over different numbers of clusters, only
two extend this comparison to clustering components other than the clustering algorithm. The titular function of
the clusterSim package performs a comparison of all combinations of requested normalisations, distance measures,
clustering algorithms and numbers of clusters according to one of six user selected RVIs with a matching evaluation
scheme enforced. Meanwhile the titular function from the AutoCluster package also enforces matching, with RVIs
computed using the same dimensionally reduced versions of the input data and Euclidean distance used during clustering.

                                                      6
2.4 Selected Relative Validity Indices

In this section we introduce the seven RVIs selected to feature in our experiments. These indices have not been chosen to
represent the state of the art, rather to capture a range of RVIs that have commonly been used for comparing partitions
from different SPs in the literature -- which overwhelmingly describes traditional and well-established RVIs. Thus we
have even included the Dunn and Davies-Bouldin indices, despite their notoriety for being amongst the worst performers
in multiple benchmark studies [154, 11].

Ref.   Name            Abbr. Opt. Inv. Description                                            SPa    Advocated
                                                                                                     Comparisonsb

[129]  Silhouette Width SWC Max       Prototype-Insensitive                                    Any   k, A
       Criterion
                                  Mean normalised difference between average distance to       Any   k, A
[46],[20] Dunn Index   DI   Max   objects in same cluster and average distance to objects in   Any   k
                                  nearest other cluster                                       Match  k, A
[35],[72], C-Index     CI   Min   Ratio of minimum set distance between clusters to maxi-
[71],[22]                         mum cluster diameter
                                  Compares the normalised sum of within-cluster distances
[77]   Area Under Curve AUCC Max  against theoretical best and worst cases

       for Clustering             Based on ROC analysis of clustering viewed as binary
                                  classification using normalised pairwise distances

                                  Prototype-Sensitive

[27]   Calinski-Harabasz CHI Max  Ratio of between-cluster to within-cluster dispersion with ED k
                                  normalisation for number of clusters
       Index

[38]   Davies-Bouldin  DBI  Min   Average of worst within-to-between cluster spread ratios ED k, A
[117]
       Index                      for each cluster

       Pakhira-        PBM Max -- Quotient of cluster separation and compactness ratios ED k

       Bandyopadhyay-             with cluster number penalty

       Mauli Index

a Euclidean Distance (ED) b Number of Clusters (k), Clustering Algorithm (A)

Table 3: This table summarises key details of the seven RVIs selected for our experiments. RVIs are grouped by their
sensitivity to prototype definitions. The columns include key references, name and abbreviation, optimization direction,
invariance to multiplicative scaling, a brief description of their computation, the SP applied when formulating/computing
the RVI, and the comparative context explicitly supported by the authors.

    The seven RVIs are presented in Table 3, grouped by their sensitivity to cluster prototypes. This grouping reflects
how the RVIs interact with prototype definitions. Take for example, a hierarchical clustering of Euclidean feature
vectors -- while prototype definitions do not affect the clustering process, they can be applied to the resulting partitions.
Values subsequently calculated for prototype-sensitive RVIs would change if the prototype definition were changed, while
prototype-insensitive RVIs would remain unchanged. For k-prototype algorithms, the distinction is more complicated as
the prototype is actively involved in the clustering process. Changing the prototype definition in this case would likely
change the partition, as well as its evaluation with prototype-sensitive RVIs.

    Table 3 provides other important details for the seven RVIs including: the original reference and other key references
involved in the development of the index, whether the index should be maximised or minimised, whether the index is
invariant to multiplicative scaling of the pairwise distances, a description of their formulation, the SP the index was
formulated in or intended to be used with, and the kinds of comparisons that the authors explicitly advocated using
their index for. Further discussion of these details and specifics regarding the computation of each RVI can be found in
Appendix A.

    It should be noticed that while these RVIs have been widely used to compare different SPs, they were initially
proposed for ranking partitions with different numbers of clusters obtained under the same SP, with some explicitly
suggesting the partitions could also be derived from different clustering algorithms. Although this doesn't necessarily
preclude these indices from effectively comparing different SPs, such usage requires theoretical or empirical support.
Our study is therefore particularly important given the widespread adoption of this practice, as discussed in Section 2.2.

    Interestingly, there is a clear distinction regarding the pairwise distances accepted by the two groups of cluster
prototypes: the prototype-insensitive RVIs were all recommended for use with any SP, while prototype-sensitive RVIs
were specifically formulated within a Euclidean data space. This is likely because a Euclidean space is required to make
the typical average centroid meaningful. Nearly all of the RVIs were scale-invariant by design, with PBM being the only
exception.

2.5 Recent Novel Relative Validity Indices

To investigate whether any more recently proposed RVIs were specifically designed for the task of SP-selection, we
reviewed a sample of recent papers proposing novel RVIs -- collected in Table 4. This table records: the name of each
index, the year it was proposed, the SP the RVIs were formulated within or intended to be used with, and the kinds of
comparisons that the authors explicitly suggested their index was intended for.

    It is noteworthy that none of the surveyed RVIs promoted the use of their index for comparing different SPs. Instead,
most of these novel RVIs were proposed in an effort to improve upon the k-selection performance of traditional RVIs in

                                                    7
Ref. Year Name                           Descriptiona                                                                  SPb Advocated
                                                                                                                                  Comparisonsc

[168] 2024 New Correlation Index         Based on Pearson correlation between all pairwise distances and the corre- Any k

                                         sponding distances between their prototypes to identify many potential k.

[132] 2023 Minimal Distance Index        Dunn-type ratio with separation measured using characteristic balls con- ED k

                                         taining a percentage of points, and compactness measured using WCSS

[44] 2023 Augmented Non-Shared           Difference of separation and compactness, both defined using representative ED k

            Nearest Neighbors            points which are the non-shared NN of point pairs with fewer shared NN.

            Cluster Validity Index

[42] 2023 Support, Length,               The average of four semantic descriptors for binary categorical datasets.     NS k

            Exclusivity and Difference

            for Group Evaluation Index

[108] 2023 Mclus                         Silhouette-type index utilising Gaussian KDE mode estimates in place of       Any  k, A
                                         the average inter- and intra-cluster distances.                               ED   k, A
[133] 2022  Validity Index for           KDE weighted normalised difference between compactness and separation
            Arbitrary-Shaped Clusters    for each point, combined in the form of the weighted average Silhouette
            Based on the Kernel
            Density Estimation

[29] 2021   Contiguous Density           A weighted sum of normalised differences between local densities and          ED k
[56] 2021   Region Index                 average densities within each cluster.                                        ED A
[127] 2021  Generalisd DuNN              Dunn-type ratio utilising ordered weighted averaging operators on the NN      DTW k
[95] 2020                                graph.                                                                        ED k
[61] 2020   Temporal Gap Statistic       Gap statistic adapted for time series by changing distance measure and        ED k
[171] 2020                               producing the random reference data via a phase space transformation.         NS k
            Volume and Area based        Area and perimeter based index relying on a 2D MDS embedding and
            Index                        spherical transformation.
            Distance-based               The Kolmogorov-Smirnov similarity between the distributions of intra-
            Separability Index           cluster distances and inter-cluster distances, averaged across all clusters.
            Density-Core-based           Dunn-type ratio with compactness measured using noise-robust MST based
            Clustering Validation Index  on local density peak set, and minimum single-linkage style separation.

[50] 2019 Mutual Equidistant-            Compactness assessed with absolute differences of all pairs of intra-cluster ED k

            Scattering Criterion         distances. Maximum inter-prototype distance for separation.

[70] 2019 Cluster Validity Index         Dunn-type ratio with density-based measure of separation and MST-based ED k, A

            based on Density-Involved measure of compactness

            Distance

[33] 2019 Local Cores-based Cluster Silhouette-type index utilising a graph-based distance between points of ED k

            Validity                     local maximum density identified using the concept of natural NN.

[147] 2019 Segment Index                 Dunn-type index with cluster dispersion measured as the average distance ED k

                                         of objects to a line segment across the dimension of maximum variation.

[92] 2018 Support Vector Data            Versions of DBI, CHI, DI and XBI with compactness measured using a ED k

            Description based RVIs       kernel representation.

a Kernel Density Estimate (KDE), Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS), Minimum Spanning Tree (MST), Nearest Neighbours

(NN), Within-Cluster Sum of Squares (WCSS)

b Dynamic Time Warping (DTW), Euclidean Distance (ED), Not Specified (NS)
c Number of Clusters (k), Clustering Algorithm (A)

Table 4: This table summarises a selection of recent novel RVIs. The columns include the reference, year, name of the
proposed RVI, a brief description of how the RVI is computed, the SP applied when formulating/computing the RVI,
and the comparative context explicitly supported by the authors.

one or more specific clustering scenarios. Traditional RVIs suffer from well-known limitations, particularly when dealing
with noisy data or clusters that exhibit variable density, complex shapes, or sub-structures [98, 113, 112]. They also
tend to inadequately penalise large, noisy clusters [36], or preference partitions dominated by one major cluster or small
outlier clusters [34, 124, 36]. While such imbalanced partitions can sometimes offer valuable insights, they are rarely
intended outcomes. Though these newer indices have shown clear improvements in some of these contexts, the continual
influx of new RVIs each year hinders their adoption, as practitioners tend to fall back on popular indices. This topic is
ripe for a broad comparative study in the vein of [154].

3 What are the issues?

Our literature review revealed that RVIs have been widely adopted for a purpose that: a) was never advocated for by
the authors of these indices, and b) they have not been established, either theoretically or experimentally, to be suitable
for. In this study, we investigated both the conceptual suitability of RVIs to SP-selection, as well as their empirical
performance. We now proceed by examining fundamental conceptual issues concerning the use of RVIs for SP-selection.

    As discussed in Sections 1 and 2, there are two basic options when computing RVIs for evaluating and comparing
candidate partitions produced by different SPs. The first option is to compute the RVI using a fixed SP, which is most
commonly chosen to be the ED applied to raw data. The second option is to compute the RVI using the same SP that
was used to produce the partition. These are the two main options for the evaluation scheme in Figure 1. Whilst the
matching-SP scheme is completely prescriptive, any number of fixed-SP schemes are possible beyond the default fixed-
ED scheme. We also consider an alternative (mean-SP) evaluation scheme in our experiments, the following discussion
focuses on the foundational matching and fixed schemes.

                                                                 8
Class 1  Class 2  Class 3  Class 4

Figure 2: Samples of time series from each of the four classes of the Trace dataset from the UCR archive [37].

Figure 3: Pairwise distance matrices and corresponding MDS embeddings for the Trace dataset using various normalisations,
raw representation and time warping edit distance.

Figure 4: Pairwise distance matrices and corresponding MDS embeddings for the Trace dataset using min-max normalisation,
various representations and Euclidean distance.

                                                                              9
Figure 5: Pairwise distance matrices and corresponding MDS embeddings for the Trace dataset using min-max normalisation,
raw representation and various distances.

Fixed Evaluation Scheme Issues

It has been suggested that within fixed-SP evaluation schemes, RVIs are likely to demonstrate a bias towards partitions
produced with the same or similar SPs [94]. If the fixed SP does not optimally capture the latent similarity structure
in the dataset, superior partitions may not be recommended as such by an RVI equipped with this evaluation scheme.

    In order to illustrate this, we introduce the Trace dataset from the UCR Time Series Classification Archive [37],
a labelled synthetic dataset consisting of 200 time series and 4 classes. Sample series from each class are presented
in Figure 2. Three sets of pairwise distance matrices have been computed for this dataset, with a single component
of the SP varying within each set. These are presented in figures Figures 3 to 5 where the normalisation procedure,
representation method and distance measure have been varied respectively. It should be noted that all of the matrices
have been scaled through division by the maximum distance, and the objects have been ordered identically in each
matrix according to the ground-truth labels. This reordering reveals the effectiveness of each of the 12 SPs in capturing
the similarity structure inherent within the dataset. The darker a pixel in the pairwise distance matrix, the closer the
pair of objects. Note that along the main diagonals, all of the distances are zero, as all distances have been formulated as
dissimilarity measures. Similar to the Visual Assessment of clustering Tendency (VAT) [21], dark blocks along the main
diagonal are indicative of groups of objects which are close together, i.e. potential clusters. The distance matrices have
been paired with one corresponding realisation of a 2D Multi-Dimensional Scaling (MDS) embedding [25] to provide
intuition when interpreting the distance matrices. MDS attempts to find a set of points in a low-dimensional space
which optimally preserves the pairwise distances. The colours of the classes in Figure 2 are consistent in the MDS plots.
Additionally, the order of classes along the x and y axes of the distance matrices matches the order of the classes in
Figure 2.

    Observing each unique SP in Figures 3 to 5 reveals that independently varying the normalisation procedure, repre-
sentation method or distance measure components of an SP will produce complex, non-linear changes to the distribution
of pairwise distances. Naturally, this is consistent with the definition of an SP. Some of the considered SPs, such as
Unit-Norm (L2) and Unit-Norm (Max) from Figure 3, only manage to distinguish the existence of two or three clusters
respectively. Even where four clusters have been identified, different SPs do so with varying degrees of cluster compact-
ness and separation. For instance, compare the separation of classes 3 and 4 according to the Markov Transition Field
SP in Figure 4 to the Grammian Angular Field SP in Figure 4. Also compare the compactness of each class according
to the Grammian Angular Field SP to the Shapelet Distance Map SP in Figure 4.

    Let's now assume that the four classes represent the optimal partition of the Trace dataset for a practitioner's
purposes. It would be "unfair" to evaluate an accurate 4-cluster partition with a fixed-SP version of an RVI where the
evaluation SP only identifies 2 or 3 clusters. The 4-cluster partition would not score well, even if it is objectively superior
to a 2- or 3-cluster partition. The case where a hypothetical evaluation SP cannot identify any inherent structure at all
is worse again. Thus it is very likely that partitions which are more consistent with the similarity structure induced by
the fixed evaluation SP will result in superior RVI values. Such partitions are most likely to be produced by clustering
algorithms applying this fixed evaluation SP. According to this argument, it would be "unfair" and unreliable to evaluate
partitions produced by distinct SPs according to a single fixed SP.

    This strongly suggests that there is no guarantee that one can reliably select the "optimal" SP by comparing RVIs

                                                                             10
computed with a fixed-SP evaluation scheme. That is unless one could know a priori which SP would best capture
the latent similarity structure of a dataset. Out of the candidates considered here for the Trace dataset, this ideal SP
appears to be the Shapelet Distance Map representation. In such a case, that ideal SP is the one that should be used
to compute the RVI -- though such computations would at that point, of course, be redundant.

Matching Evaluation Scheme Issues

It may now seem obvious that the evaluation SP should always match the clustering SP, else biases can result from
differing identifications of cluster structure with fixed schemes. However, it has not been established empirically or
theoretically, nor is it immediately obvious, that the matching-SP evaluation scheme is any more suitable when seeking
out an optimal SP among multiple candidates. We have identified three factors which contribute to its unsuitability.

                            0.9

                            0.8

Silhouette Width Criterion  0.7

                            0.6

                            0.5

                            0.4           Meat DodgerLoopWeekend Coffee  DistalPhalanxTW ECG5000  ECGFiveDays          Distance Measure
                            0.3
                            0.2                                            UCR Dataset                                    Move Split Merge
                            0.1                                                                                           Shape-Based
                            0.0 OliveOil                                                                                  Dynamic Time Warping
                                                                                                                          Time Warp Edit
                                                                                                                          Euclidean
                                                                                                                          Manhattan
                                                                                                                          Cosine
                                                                                                               Plane DiatomSizeReduction Fungi

Figure 6: For each of ten selected datasets from the UCR archive [37], seven different versions of the SWC based on seven different
SPs have been computed for the ground-truth partition from the archive. Note that for each SP, z-normalisation was applied and
the raw data representation was used. The shape-based distance is the same employed in the k-shape clustering approach [118].
Dynamic Time Warping was computed with a 5% Sakoe-Chiba band, Move-Split-Merge with cost parameter 1, and Time Warp
Edit with  = 0.05 and  = 1.

    Firstly, despite appearances, each coupling of RVI and SP actually produces a unique "statistic" with its own
distribution. As a result, RVIs equipped with different SPs will score the exact same partition differently. For instance,
Figure 6 presents SWC values computed with a matching evaluation scheme for seven different SPs across ten datasets
from the UCR Archive. If it is appropriate to perform SP-selection with matching RVIs, the partition producing the
maximum SWC would be indicative of the optimal SP for each dataset. However, for each of the datasets, it was only
the ground truth partition that

    That each coupling of RVI and SP produces a unique statistic is further demonstrated in Figure 7, where empirical
distributions of the SWC have been computed for the Trace dataset with three different SPs from Figures 3 and 4.
Each of these distributions vary across measures of centre, modality, spread and tail mass. For this dataset, the total
number of possible non-trivial partitions is the Bell number B200 - 2  6 × 10275 [17, 128], hence these distributions
were obtained by uniformly sampling 3 × 106 such partitions according to the scheme presented in [139]. These clear
distinctions between distributions are also maintained for uniformly random partitions with fixed numbers of clusters.

    Moreover, suppose we could feasibly evaluate all B200 - 2 partitions using a fixed-SP version of an RVI, resulting in
a ranking of the partitions (many of which are unlikely to be of interest to practitioners). This ranking can and will
change when we embed the data in another SP and compute the alternative fixed-SP version of the RVI. This further
supports the conclusion that RVIs based on different SPs are unfit for the sort of straightforward comparisons made
when selecting between partitions with different numbers of clusters or produced by different clustering algorithms. This
is because, in the latter case, the underlying ranking of partitions remains fixed under a single SP.

    Secondly, when using RVIs for the task of SP-selection, practitioners are essentially trying to recover some theoretical,
unobservable ranking of their candidate SPs. However, clustering algorithms are heuristics which search only a subspace
of all BN partitions, and therefore they are liable to fall-short of the globally optimal partition, instead returning inferior
local maxima or greedy solutions. Hence there is no guarantee that the ranking of matching-SP RVI values computed
for the purpose of SP-selection will coincide with the actual, unobserved ranking of the SPs anyway.

                                                                         11
    The final effect which might make the matching-SP scheme unreliable is the variable size of the bias effect discussed
for fixed-SP schemes. If an RVI shows a larger bias towards some SPs than others, the ranking of SPs suggested by
the matching-SP evaluation scheme becomes even more unreliable. This makes it difficult to know when comparing
matching-SP RVIs if a particular partition is really better or worse, or if the bias conferred is more significant for one
SP than another.

   The following analogy can provide some intuition into the core issues facing both the fixed and matching evaluation
schemes. Consider the problem of attempting to rank the performance of track and field athletes with different special-
isations, or selecting the best performer amongst them. The athletes represent SPs, and their ranking within an event
is analogous to the ranking of a corresponding partition according to an RVI. The fixed evaluation scheme is akin to
ranking the athletes based on their performance in only the 100m sprint. Clearly this scheme will be biased towards
runners, particularly those athletes regularly competing in the 100m sprint. Meanwhile, the matching evaluation scheme
is akin to ranking the athletes according to their performances within their individual events. But how can we compare
21.84 seconds in the 200m sprint to 22.85 meters in the shotput?

    Whether a combinatorial scheme similar to that used in [73] and [94] avoids the pitfalls described for the fixed and
matching schemes also has not been established theoretically or experimentally. We have investigated this variety of
evaluation scheme empirically by considering the arithmetic mean over all candidate fixed schemes, referred to as the
mean-SP evaluation scheme.

                 Figure 7: Empirical distributions of the SWC computed for the Trace dataset with three different SPs.

4 Experimental Design

As previously discussed, this is the first study the authors are aware of that has attempted to empirically establish the
suitability of RVIs for comparing the performance of different SPs for clustering. To this end we have conducted an
extensive analysis over three different batteries of datasets. The experiments are used to address the following three
questions introduced in Section 1:

  (i) Do RVIs equipped with a fixed-SP evaluation scheme demonstrate an observable bias towards partitions generated
       from clustering approaches employing the same SP?

  (ii) Is there a difference in reliability between the fixed-SP, matching-SP and mean-SP evaluation schemes for either
       of the SP- or k-selection tasks?

 (iii) Are RVIs as reliable for SP-selection as they are for their conventional application of k-selection?

4.1 Methodology

The experimental methodology first introduced by Vendramin et al. [154] and employed in [78, 155, 123, 112] for the
comparison of distinct relative validity criteria has been used alongside the complementary methodology, introduced
by [62] and used in [11], to establish insights into each of the three points above. The former involves analysing the
correlations between an RVI and an EVI amongst a subset of partitions. Previously this has been used to compare
distinct RVIs, but in this paper it will be used to compare different fixed-SP and matching-SP versions of RVIs. It is
proposed that superior versions of RVIs will more closely reflect the partition rankings established by an EVI, which
is leveraging supervised information from labelled datasets. The latter methodology observes the rate at which the
different versions of an RVI and an EVI are optimised for the same partition amongst a subset of partitions. As we are
attempting to establish the suitability of RVIs for the task of SP-selection, we have chosen to compare their performance
against the baseline task of k-selection. A similar level of performance on both tasks would be taken to suggest that,
insofar as RVIs are dependable for k-selection, they can be relied upon for SP-selection.

                                                                             12
    The methodology introduced by Vendramin et al. was proposed to address several limitations identified in a prior
approach, which gained prominence in the seminal work on RVI comparison by Milligan and Cooper [105]. Milligan
and Cooper's methodology assumed that the accuracy of an RVI could be quantified by the frequency with which it
suggested as the optimal partition, one which had the same number of clusters as the ground truth partition. An
extensive examination of this success rate approach is presented in [154] where, amongst other critiques, it is recognised
that unnatural partitions could be found by an RVI with the "correct" number of clusters, whilst natural partitions
may be found with the "wrong" number of clusters. This criticism was independently echoed in [62] and referred to
as the algorithm correctness assumption. The latter suggested that instead of counting the number of times an RVI
recommends any partition with the same number of clusters as the ground-truth, one should instead count the number
of times an RVI recommends the partition which also optimises an EVI. This improved success rate methodology was
implemented in a comparative study [11], and whilst an improvement on [105], observing the coincidence of optima
similarly ignores all of the values of the RVIs for the remaining partitions. It was suggested in [154] that their novel
methodology could be used to complement the success rate methodology. This is the view taken by the authors of
the current study. Given that we are not comparing the relative performance of RVIs, but rather their suitability for
different tasks, more angles for analysis of this suitability is beneficial.

    Conveniently, both of the above methodologies require the running of identical experiments. Namely, many partitions
should be produced and evaluated by EVIs and by RVIs equipped with fixed-SP, matching-SP and mean-SP evaluation
schemes. These partitions should be produced for an array of different datasets, with settings such as the clustering
algorithm, number of clusters, and SP all varying. This same procedure also allows for an analysis of bias, allowing us
to address each of the inquiries (i)-(iii) from above. The methodology for producing the partitions and their evaluation
is described below:

   1. Take a battery of N datasets with known ground-truth labels.

   2. Select an appropriate subset of N unique SPs for clustering the datasets. Various normalisations, representations,
       distances, or combinations thereof could be employed.

   3. Select a subset of N RVIs, and one (or more) EVIs.

   4. For each combination of dataset and SP, vary the parameters of one or more clustering algorithms to produce N
       partitions with assorted qualities and numbers of clusters. Note that we have used N clustering algorithms and
       N numbers of clusters, i.e. N = N × N.

   5. For all of these N × N partitions associated with one dataset, compute the EVI/s and use all N SPs to compute
       N versions of each RVI.

   6. Subset the partitions such that all factors are static other than the number of clusters if assessing k-selection, or
       the SP if assessing SP-selection. Record the correlation and coincidence of optima with the EVI/s and: (i) the
       N versions of each RVI to assess them when using all N fixed-SP evaluation schemes; (ii) the average of the N
       versions of each RVI to assess them when using the mean-SP scheme, and; (iii) the version of each RVI where the
       SP matches that used in clustering to assess them when using the matching-SP evaluation scheme. Repeat for
       each relevant subset according to the task under assessment.

   7. Repeat item 6 for each dataset.

                                   Fixed-SP

Partition   SP   ARI   SWCED    SWCDTW SWCSBD   SWCMSM    SWCMean   SWCMatch  OWM

     A      ED   0.82    0.75   0.53  0.68          0.48      0.61      0.75      1
     B     DTW   0.74     0.64  0.61  0.69          0.47      0.60      0.61      0
     C     SBD   0.85     0.76  0.62  0.71          0.51      0.65      0.71      0
     D     MSM   0.79     0.69  0.65  0.70         0.53       0.64      0.53      0

    CO       --   --        1   0            1        0         1         0      --
  Corr.      --   --        1                        0.4       0.9       0.6     --
                                0     0.4

Table 5: An example to clarify the experimental methodology. ED, DTW, SBD and MSM represent different similarity
paradigms, and have been used to produce each of the partitions A, B, C and D respectively for a static combination
of dataset, clustering algorithm and number of clusters. Each partition has been scored according to an external index
(ARI), 4 fixed-SP versions of the SWC (SWCED, SWCDTW, SWCSBD, SWCMSM), the mean of the 4 fixed-SP versions
of the SWC (SWCMean) and the matching-SP version of the SWC (SWCMatch). OWM is a boolean variable that is True
when the SP used to generate the partition also produces the optimum fixed-SP version of the SWC. CO is another
boolean variable which is True when the optimum value of SWCx coincides with the optimum value of the ARI. The
final row of the table stores the correlation between SWCx and the ARI.

    For clarification of this procedure when assessing SP-selection, consider Table 5 where four different SPs have been
used to produce partitions for a a static combination of dataset, clustering algorithm and number of clusters. Note that

                                      13
each SP specifies a fixed-SP version of the RVI, which for this example is the SWC, and these are denoted by SWCED,
SWCDTW, SWCSBD and SWCMSM. The matching-SP version, SWCMatch is constructed by taking the appropriate values
(shown in bold) from the fixed-SP columns. The mean-SP version, SWCMean, is constructed by taking the average of
all of the fixed-SP columns.

    A boolean variable, Optimal When Matching (OWM), is True (= 1) when the SP used to generate the partition
also produces the optimum fixed-SP version of the SWC. This is used to assess the fixed-SP evaluation schemes for bias
towards partitions produced with the same SP. If no such bias exists, then we could expect that OWM is a Bernoulli
random variable with probability of success 1/N. A second boolean variable, Coincident Optima (CO), is True for a
version of the RVI if its optimum over the partitions coincides with the optimum of the EVI. We use the term optimum as
we considered a mixture of maximisation and minimisation criterion. Finally, the correlation can be computed between
each version of the RVI and the EVI. A similar table could also be arranged to assess k-selection by allowing the number
of clusters to vary for a static combination of dataset, clustering algorithm and SP. By computing both tables for all
combinations of dataset, SP, clustering algorithm and numbers of clusters across three batteries of datasets, we can
understand the performance of RVIs on the SP-selection task, relative to the k-selection task.

4.2 Indices

Many EVIs have been proposed in the literature, typically classified into three categories according to the techniques
they use to assess similarity between partitions. There are pair-counting, information theoretic and set-matching EVIs
[165, 12]. Most EVIs, including the ARI, rely on pair-counting techniques, which assess similarity by counting the
number of object pairs that are either consistently grouped together or consistently placed in separate groups across
the two partitions. Information theoretic EVIs, such as the Adjusted Mutual Information (AMI) [156], treat partitions
as categorical random variables and measure their similarity through mutual dependence between these variables. Set-
matching EVIs, such as the F-measure or Purity [4], attempt to find the best matches between clusters in the two
partitions. A notable drawback of EVIs from this category is the exclusion of unpaired clusters and unmatched cluster
portions from the similarity assessment [102].

    In comparing EVIs for clustering evaluation, [79] found that ARI and AMI were particularly suitable due to their
independence from the number of clusters and their adjustment for chance, with an expected value of zero for comparisons
with random partitions. Milligan and Cooper [106] recommended ARI as the standard for external validation, a position
supported by later research [104, 140, 79]. Based on this evidence, we primarily report results using the ARI. We also
computed the AMI, which produced consistent trends and observations, with corresponding results provided in the
supplementary materials. Given the fundamentally different ways these EVIs compute similarity, this consistency
suggests that our conclusions are robust to the choice of EVI.

    The RVIs selected for our experiments were introduced in Section 2.4 and include the prototype-insensitive SWC,
DI, CI, and AUCC. The prototype-sensitive CHI, DBI, and PBM are also used with the medoid prototype definition
enforced for all similarity paradigms due to its general suitability. Where multiple medoids were obtained (such as for a
cluster of size 2), one was selected at random. The correlation values were computed using Pearson's product-moment
correlation coefficient. It should also be noted that for the DBI and CI, which are minimisation criteria, correlation
analysis was performed using the negative of the calculated values. In the event that all of the partitions are identical,
the ARI and RVI values will be constant and the correlation is undefined. Such instances have been excluded from
further analyses.

4.3 Clustering Components

The following experimental settings will be maintained across all three batteries, and settings unique to each battery
will be detailed subsequently. All experiments have been performed using Python 3.9.4 on a linux-based HPC. As was
demonstrated in Section 3, a unique SP can be produced by varying any one of three components of the clustering
approach. However, for simplicity we will restrict our attention to varying only the distance measures. The distance
measures used will be specified for each battery as they are introduced.

    The range of partitions will be produced by passing the corresponding pairwise distance matrices through the
following nine clustering algorithms: BIRCH and spectral clustering with a Gaussian (RBF) kernel from scikit-learn,
k-medoids from scikit-learn-extra, hierarchical agglomerative clustering with single, complete, average, weighted
and wards linkages from fastcluster, and genieclust from genieclust [55]. The partition with optimal inertia using
the PAM method was accepted from 30 initialisations of the k-medoids algorithm, with a maximum of 100 iterations.
The genieclust threshold was set to 0.3 for all batteries. The threshold parameter for BIRCH, the Gaussian kernel's
width parameter  for SC, and the range of k (number of clusters) for the partitions will also be specified as each battery
is introduced. We have opted to exclude the popular k-means algorithm and instead use the similar k-medoids algorithm
due to concerns that the mean is not meaningful for some of the distance measures used in this study.

4.4 Datasets

                                                                             14
   The experimental methodologies described in Section 4.1 are not inert to criticisms, which have primarily been
concerned with the adequacy of the ground-truth class labels. In [48] it is noted that class labels do not always
correspond to natural clusters, and that in such situations multiple data labellings may be required to capture all
natural clusterings of a dataset. This concern is shared in [153] where they observed that, whilst a high EVI score is
easily interpreted, low scores are not necessarily indicative of low quality partitions. As will be discussed below, these
concerns have been mitigated in the current study by selecting this combination of three batteries of datasets:

   I) the Vendramin et al. datasets [154];

  II) Gagolewski's clustering-benchmarks package datasets [54];

 III) the UCR Time Series Classification archive datasets [37].

These batteries and pertinent experimental settings have been summarised in Table 6.

Battery  N N N N  N

Vendramin 972 6  9 49 2 571 912
                 9 21 64 638
Gagolewski 57 6  9 11 77 616

UCR      112 7

Table 6: For each of the three batteries, this table details the number of: datasets in the battery (N), candidate SPs
used for clustering (N), clustering algorithms producing partitions (N), unique numbers of clusters for those partitions
(N) and the total number of partitions produced for the battery (N × N × N × N).

4.4.1 The Vendramin Battery

Produced for [154] using the method introduced in Milligan and Cooper's seminal work [105], the Vendramin battery
consists of synthetic Euclidean datasets where the distribution of the objects within clusters follows a (mildly) truncated
multi-variate normal distribution. This ensures that the datasets feature well-separated and compact Gaussian globular
clusters which "exhibit the properties of external isolation and internal cohesion". As various clustering algorithms
will be used with varying parameters, including the number of clusters, we still obtained partitions spanning all levels
of quality (see Figure 15b). Thus the relative simplicity of these datasets strikes a balance between complexity and
ensuring that the issue described by [48] is avoided almost entirely.

    Each dataset features 500 objects embedded in n dimensions, where n  {2, 3, 4, 22, 23, 24}, and with k known
clusters, where k  {2, 4, 6, 12, 14, 16}. The points were balanced between the clusters according to three different
settings: a) approximately balanced, b) one cluster has 10% of the objects, and the remainder are approximately evenly
distributed amongst the remaining clusters, c) one cluster has 60% of the objects for k  {2, 4, 6} or 20% of the objects
for k  {12, 14, 16}, and the remainder are again approximately evenly distributed amongst the remaining clusters. The
battery consists of a total of 972 datasets (6 dimensions × 6 numbers of clusters × 3 cluster balances × 9 replications).

    For this battery we have used the raw data without applying any normalisation. The following set of distance
measures were used to define the unique similarity paradigms: Euclidean Distance (ED), Manhattan Distance (MD),
Cosine Distance (CoD), Canberra Distance (CaD), Braycurtis Distance (BD) and Chebyshev Distance (ChD). All of
these distances are available from the scipy package. In accordance with performance findings in [53] and preliminary
experimentation, better clustering outputs were obtained when the BIRCH threshold parameter was set to 0.01, and 
was chosen to be 10 for the SC Gaussian kernel. For the generated partitions we have emulated the larger range of k
from the original paper which featured in the presented results, i.e. k  {2, 3, . . . , 50}.

4.4.2 The Gagolewski Battery

The clustering-benchmarks package provides convenient access to a range of "clustering benchmark collections referred
to across the machine learning and data mining literature." Most of these collections of datasets are designed to challenge
traditional clustering methods, being composed mainly of points embedded in Euclidean space with clusters of arbitrary
shapes, varying densities or varying degrees of overlap. Another key characteristic differentiating this battery is the
provision of multiple alternative labellings for a subset of the datasets. The EVI recorded for a clustering of a multiply
labelled dataset is the maximum EVI computed with any of the ground-truth partitions. This feature of the battery
also addresses the concerns of [48].

    We will use datasets from the five recommended collections (wut, sipu, fcps, graves and other ) in one aggregated
battery. The individual datasets will be referred to using the format collection/name. Some of the reference labels for
a selection of the datasets include a label allocating noise. These noisy labellings will not be used in our study, which
means that 8 datasets with exclusively noisy labellings will be excluded. We have also omitted sipu/birch1, sipu/birch2,
sipu/worms 2 and sipu/worms 64 as they are significantly larger than the other datasets in this battery (at least 10×
more objects than the next largest dataset) and would create further computational hurdles. This leaves us with 57
datasets, of which 8 have two or more reference labellings. Pertinent details of these datasets are presented in Table 7,
including the inclusive range of integer k that partitions were produced for, which was a window with 21 values centered

                                                                             15
Name                n d l k  k           Name            n d l k     k

wut/circles         4000 2 1 4 [2, 22] sipu/a1           3000 2 1 20 [10, 30]

wut/cross           2000 2 1 4 [2, 22] sipu/a2           5250 2 1 35 [25, 45]

wut/graph           2500 2 1 10 [2, 22] sipu/a3          7500 2 1 50 [40, 60]

wut/isolation       9000 2 1 3 [2, 22] sipu/aggregation  788 2 1 7   [2, 22]

wut/labirynth       3546 2 1 6 [2, 22] sipu/compound     399 2 3 4,5,6 [2, 22]

wut/mk1             300 2 1 3 [2, 22] sipu/d31           3100 2 1 31 [21, 41]

wut/mk2             1000 2 1 2 [2, 22] sipu/flame        240 2 1 2   [2, 22]

wut/mk3             600 3 1 3 [2, 22] sipu/jain          373 2 1 2   [2, 22]

wut/mk4             1500 3 1 3 [2, 22] sipu/pathbased    300 2 2 3,4 [2, 22]

wut/olympic         5000 2 1 5 [2, 22] sipu/r15          600 2 3 8,9,15 [2, 22]

wut/smile           1000 2 2 4,6 [2, 22] sipu/s1         5000 2 1 15 [5, 25]

wut/stripes         5000 2 1 2 [2, 22] sipu/s2           5000 2 1 15 [5, 25]

wut/trajectories    10000 2 1 4 [2, 22] sipu/s3          5000 2 1 15 [5, 25]

wut/trapped lovers  5000 3 1 3 [2, 22] sipu/s4           5000 2 1 15 [5, 25]

wut/twosplashes     400 2 1 2 [2, 22] sipu/spiral        312 2 1 3   [2, 22]

wut/windows         2977 2 1 5 [2, 22] sipu/unbalance    6500 2 1 8  [2, 22]

wut/x1              120 2 1 3 [2, 22] fcps/atom          800 3 1 2   [2, 22]

wut/x2              120 2 1 4 [2, 22] fcps/chainlink     1000 3 1 2  [2, 22]

wut/x3              185 2 2 3,4 [2, 22] fcps/engytime    1000 3 2 2  [2, 22]

wut/z1              192 2 1 3 [2, 22] fcps/hepta         212 3 1 7   [2, 22]

wut/z2              900 2 1 5 [2, 22] fcps/lsun          400 2 1 3   [2, 22]

wut/z3              1000 2 1 4 [2, 22] fcps/target       770 2 1 6   [2, 22]

graves/dense        200 2 1 2 [2, 22] fcps/tetra         400 3 1 4   [2, 22]

graves/fuzzyx       1000 2 1 5 [2, 22] fcps/twodiamonds 800 2 1 2    [2, 22]

graves/line         250 2 1 2 [2, 22] fcps/wingnut       1016 2 1 2  [2, 22]

graves/parabolic    1000 2 2 2,4 [2, 22] other/iris      150 4 1 3   [2, 22]

graves/ring         1000 2 1 2 [2, 22] other/iris5       105 4 1 3   [2, 22]

graves/ring outliers 1030 2 1 5 [2, 22] other/square     1000 2 1 2  [2, 22]

graves/zigzag       250 2 2 3,5 [2, 22]

Table 7: Details of the 57 clustering-benchmarks datasets. For each dataset, the table specifies the number of points

(n), the number of features (d), the number of unique ground-truth labellings (l) and the associated numbers of ground-
truth clusters (k), and the range of k values used to produce partitions.

around the ground truth numbers of clusters. The lower value was computed as max {2, (min k + max k) /2 - 10},
and the upper value as max {22, (min k + max k) /2 + 10} for each dataset, where · denotes the ceiling function.

    As for the Vendramin battery, the raw data have been used without any normalisation, and the same set of distance
measures have been used to define the unique similarity paradigms. The BIRCH threshold parameter was again set
to 0.01, and  was chosen to be 10 for the SC Gaussian kernel. It should be noted that the combination of complete
linkage hierarchical clustering algorithm and Canberra distance sometimes failed to produce partitions with the requested
number of clusters on the lower end of the range. This was due to the last agglomeration in the dendrogram collecting
k = 3, 4, 5 or 6 clusters into one. For this combination, 85/1120 of the partitions were trivial (all elements in one cluster)
across 25/57 datasets. We have carried out analyses on the complete cases.

4.4.3 The UCR Archive Battery

The UCR archive is the most extensive battery of publicly available labelled time series, providing a good variety of
time series datasets where many different SPs can be optimal. Whilst the archive provides neither of the class label
guarantees enjoyed by the other two batteries, it could be argued that non-standard SPs are more common for complex
non-Euclidean datasets. Thus it is more relevant to perform these experiments on such datasets, and so this battery is
used to complement the results from the other two. This battery is certainly a suitable candidate to be developed into
a proper clustering benchmark battery with multiple alternative labellings, similar to the Gagolewski battery. We have
used a subset of 112 datasets of the 128 supplied in the archive, and these are detailed in Table 8. This subset is the
same that was employed in a time series clustering benchmark study [79], where datasets of variable lengths or with
missing values were also excluded. Being a classification archive, a default train-test split is supplied for each dataset,
and these have been combined for our purposes.

    The first 85 datasets forming the archive were contributed with z-normalisation already applied, whilst some of the
43 newer datasets have undergone no normalisation. Only two of the datasets we used in this study were supplied
to the archive without normalisation, thus for the sake of consistency, we have normalised all of the datasets using
z-normalisation. These datasets are larger on average again than in the Gagolewski battery, hence we have considered
a narrower window with 11 values centered around the ground truth number of clusters. The lower value was computed
as max {2, k - 5}, and the upper value as max {12, k + 5} for each dataset.

    The following set of distance measures were used to define the unique similarity paradigms: Euclidean Distance (ED),
Manhattan distance (MD), Cosine Distance (CD), Shape-Based Distance (SBD) from the k-shape clustering approach,
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) with a 5% Sakoe-Chiba band, Move-Split-Merge (MSM) with cost c = 1, and Time
Warping Edit Distance (TWED) with  = 0.05 and  = 1. We used the aeon implementations for DTW, MSM and
TWED, and the kshape implementation of SBD. The BIRCH threshold parameter was set to 0.1, and reduced by factors

                                         16
Name                          n       d k    k            Name                            n      d k    k

ACSF1                            200  1460   10 [5, 15]   Mallat                          2400   1024    8 [3, 13]
Adiac                            781   176   37 [32, 42]  Meat                             120    448    3 [2, 12]
ArrowHead                        211   251                MedicalImages                             99  10 [5, 15]
BME                              180   128    3 [2, 12]   MelbournePedestrian             1141      24  10 [5, 15]
Beef                                   470    3 [2, 12]   MiddlePhalanxOutlineAgeGroup    3633      80   3 [2, 12]
BeetleFly                         60   512    5 [2, 12]   MiddlePhalanxOutlineCorrect               80   2 [2, 12]
BirdChicken                       40   512    2 [2, 12]   MiddlePhalanxTW                  554      80   6 [2, 12]
CBF                               40   128    2 [2, 12]   MixedShapesRegularTrain          891           5 [2, 12]
Car                              930   577    3 [2, 12]   MixedShapesSmallTrain            553   1024    5 [2, 12]
Chinatown                        120     24   4 [2, 12]   MoteStrain                      2925   1024    2 [2, 12]
ChlorineConcentration            363   166    2 [2, 12]   NonInvasiveFetalECGThorax1      2525          42 [37, 47]
CinCECGTorso                   4307           3 [2, 12]   NonInvasiveFetalECGThorax2      1272      84  42 [37, 47]
Coffee                         1420   1639    4 [2, 12]   OSULeaf                         3765    750    6 [2, 12]
Computers                         56   286    2 [2, 12]   OliveOil                        3765    750    4 [2, 12]
CricketX                         500   720    2 [2, 12]   PhalangesOutlinesCorrect         442    427    2 [2, 12]
CricketY                         780   300   12 [7, 17]   Phoneme                                 570   39 [34, 44]
CricketZ                         780   300   12 [7, 17]   PigAirwayPressure                  60         52 [47, 57]
Crop                             780   300   12 [7, 17]   PigArtPressure                  2658      80  52 [47, 57]
DiatomSizeReduction           24000      46  24 [19, 29]  PigCVP                          2110   1024   52 [47, 57]
DistalPhalanxOutlineAgeGroup     322   345    4 [2, 12]   Plane                                  2000    7 [2, 12]
DistalPhalanxOutlineCorrect      539     80   3 [2, 12]   PowerCons                        312   2000    2 [2, 12]
DistalPhalanxTW                  876     80   2 [2, 12]   ProximalPhalanxOutlineAgeGroup   312   2000    3 [2, 12]
DodgerLoopDay                    539     80   6 [2, 12]   ProximalPhalanxOutlineCorrect    312           2 [2, 12]
DodgerLoopGame                   158   288    7 [2, 12]   ProximalPhalanxTW                210    144    6 [2, 12]
DodgerLoopWeekend                158   288    2 [2, 12]   RefrigerationDevices             360    144    3 [2, 12]
ECG5000                          158   288    2 [2, 12]   Rock                             605           4 [2, 12]
ECGFiveDays                    5000    140    5 [2, 12]   ScreenType                       891      80   3 [2, 12]
EOGHorizontalSignal              884   136    2 [2, 12]   SemgHandGenderCh2                605      80   2 [2, 12]
EOGVerticalSignal                724         12 [7, 17]   SemgHandMovementCh2              750      80   6 [2, 12]
Earthquakes                      724  1250   12 [7, 17]   SemgHandSubjectCh2                      720    5 [2, 12]
ElectricDevices                  461  1250    2 [2, 12]   ShapeletSim                        70  2844    2 [2, 12]
EthanolLevel                  16637           7 [2, 12]   ShapesAll                        750    720   60 [55, 65]
FaceAll                        1004    512    4 [2, 12]   SmallKitchenAppliances           900   1500    3 [2, 12]
FaceFour                       2250      96  14 [9, 19]   SmoothSubspace                   900   1500    3 [2, 12]
FacesUCR                         112          4 [2, 12]   SonyAIBORobotSurface1            900   1500    2 [2, 12]
FiftyWords                     2250   1751   14 [9, 19]   SonyAIBORobotSurface2            200    500    2 [2, 12]
Fish                             905   131   50 [45, 55]  StarLightCurves                 1200    512    3 [2, 12]
FreezerRegularTrain              350   350    7 [2, 12]   Strawberry                       750    720    2 [2, 12]
FreezerSmallTrain              3000    131    2 [2, 12]   SwedishLeaf                      300      15  15 [10, 20]
Fungi                          2878    270    2 [2, 12]   Symbols                          621      70   6 [2, 12]
GunPoint                         204   463   18 [13, 23]  SyntheticControl                 980      65   6 [2, 12]
GunPointAgeSpan                  200   301    2 [2, 12]   ToeSegmentation1                9236   1024    2 [2, 12]
GunPointMaleVersusFemale         451   301    2 [2, 12]   ToeSegmentation2                 983    235    2 [2, 12]
GunPointOldVersusYoung           451   201    2 [2, 12]   Trace                           1125    128    4 [2, 12]
Ham                              451   150    2 [2, 12]   TwoLeadECG                      1020    398    2 [2, 12]
HandOutlines                     214   150    2 [2, 12]   TwoPatterns                      600      60   4 [2, 12]
Haptics                        1370    150    2 [2, 12]   UMD                              268    277    3 [2, 12]
Herring                          463   150    5 [2, 12]   UWaveGestureLibraryAll           166    343    8 [3, 13]
HouseTwenty                      128   431    2 [2, 12]   UWaveGestureLibraryX             200    275    8 [3, 13]
InlineSkate                      159          2 [2, 12]   UWaveGestureLibraryY            1162      82   8 [3, 13]
InsectEPGRegularTrain            650  2709    7 [2, 12]   UWaveGestureLibraryZ            5000    128    8 [3, 13]
InsectEPGSmallTrain              311  1092    3 [2, 12]   Wine                             180    150    2 [2, 12]
InsectWingbeatSound              266          3 [2, 12]   WordSynonyms                    4478    945   25 [20, 30]
ItalyPowerDemand               2200    512   11 [6, 16]   Worms                           4478    315    5 [2, 12]
LargeKitchenAppliances         1096   2000    2 [2, 12]   WormsTwoClass                   4478    315    2 [2, 12]
Lightning7                       750  1882    3 [2, 12]   Yoga                            4478    315    2 [2, 12]
                                 143          7 [2, 12]                                    111    234
                                       601                                                 905    270
                                       601                                                 258    900
                                       256                                                 258    900
                                                                                          3300    426
                                         24
                                       720
                                       319

Table 8: Details of the 112 UCR classification archive datasets. For each dataset, the table specifies the number of
points (n), the number of features (d), the number of ground-truth clusters (k), and the range of k values used to

produce partitions.

of 10 until the requested number of clusters was returned by the algorithm. Similarly,  was set to 20 and incremented
by 20 until the requested number of clusters was obtained.

5 Experimental Results

5.1 Analysis of Bias Towards Matching Similarity Paradigms

In Section 3 it was suggested that RVIs may demonstrate a bias towards partitions produced using the same similarity
paradigm they are computed with. As previously illustrated in Table 5 with a toy example, a boolean variable, OWM,
recorded whether the fixed-SP version of an RVI is optimal when it matches the clustering SP. The average of these
booleans across all partitions of a single dataset from different clustering algorithms and numbers of clusters is used to

                                                          17
indicate the bias for one combination of dataset, RVI and SP within each of the three batteries. If an RVI does not
show a bias for the matching (or a particular) SP, then these OWM averages should be symmetrically distributed about
1/N, i.e. 1/6 for the Vendramin and Gagolewski batteries, and 1/7 for the UCR battery. The distributions of average
OWM values over the datasets from each battery are presented in Figure 8 as enhanced box-plots (boxen-plots), or
"letter value" plots [68]. The distributions are grouped by RVI on the left, and further broken down by both RVI and
SP on the right. The expected value in the absence of any bias is shown by the red horizontal dashed lines.

             1.0                                                                                 ED
                                                                                                 MD
                                                                                                 BD
             0.8                                                                                 CaD

                                                                                                 ChD
Average OWM                                                                                      CoD
             0.6

             0.4

             0.2

             0.0  AUCC CI SWC DRBVII DI CHI PBM  AUCC  CI  SWC             RDVBII  DI  CHI  PBM

                                                           (a) Vendramin

             1.0                                                                                 ED
                                                                                                 MD
                                                                                                 BD
             0.8                                                                                 CaD

                                                                                                 ChD
Average OWM                                                                                      CoD
             0.6

             0.4

             0.2

             0.0  AUCC CI SWC DRBVII DI CHI PBM  AUCC  CI  SWC             RDVBII  DI  CHI  PBM

                                                           (b) Gagolewski

             1.0                                                                                 MSM
                                                                                                 SBD
                                                                                                 DTW
             0.8                                                                                 TWED

                                                                                                 ED
Average OWM                                                                                      MD
             0.6                                                                                 CD

             0.4

             0.2

             0.0  AUCC CI SWC DRBVII DI CHI PBM  AUCC  CI  SWC             RDVBII  DI  CHI  PBM

                                                           (c) UCR

Figure 8: Enhanced boxplots of the distributions of average OWM values for each battery grouped by RVI on the left, and further
by SP on the right. Each point in both groupings represents the average OWM for partitions clustered using one SP on a single
dataset. Averaging was performed over all of the corresponding partitions produced by the different clustering algorithms, with
different numbers of clusters. The expected value (1/N) in the absence of any bias is shown by the red horizontal dashed lines.

    Firstly we shall consider the distributions grouped by RVI. Interestingly, the distributions for each RVI are for the
most part consistent across the three batteries in terms of both location and variation. AUCC, SWC and DBI clearly
demonstrated this theorised bias across all three batteries, with the DI showing similar bias for the first two batteries.
Whilst not showing a positive bias, the CHI and PBM indices were still not symmetrically distributed around the
expected value, suggesting that certain SPs were consistently producing the optimal version of these RVIs. The labels
on the horizontal axis have been used to indicate the outcome of appropriately directed one-sided Wilcoxon signed rank
tests at a 99.9% confidence level. A red label indicates a significant result, followed by the direction, whilst a black
label suggests failure to reject. These indicate that the medians for AUCC, SWC and DBI were statistically significantly
greater than 1/N for all three batteries, while the median for CHI was also found to be lower with statistical significance
for all three batteries. The median for DI was greater with statistical significance for the Vendramin and Gagolewski
batteries, and the median for PBM was lower for Vendramin and UCR. The CI was the only index with significant
outcomes in both directions. The use of hierarchical clustering algorithms suggests some caution should be used when
interpreting the output of any statistical test applied to the data from our experiments, as it is questionable whether the
independence assumption is valid. This is due to the high degree of similarity between partitions with adjacent numbers
of clusters in a hierarchical clustering solution. We have attempted to mitigate this by employing a range of linkages

                                                           18
and non-hierarchical algorithms and using a high confidence level.
    Now we shall discuss the distributions grouped by RVI and SP in the right-hand plots from Figure 8. The extent

of the bias appears to be quite extreme for particular combinations of RVI and SP. Consider the PBM index for the
Vendramin battery (rightmost cell of Figure 8a), where PBMChD was never optimal for ChD clusterings, whilst PBMMD
was optimal for most of the MD clusterings. It is thus likely that PBMMD was overwhelmingly the optimal version of
the PBM index for this battery, regardless of the clustering SP. A similar observation can be made for CI and CHI in
Figure 8a, where the CoD version was frequently optimal for CoD clusterings.

    The fixed-CoD evaluation scheme demonstrates one of the largest and most consistent bias effects across the majority
of the RVIs for the Vendramin and Gagolewski batteries. CoD is arguably the most unique SP amongst those considered
for these batteries. In contrast, there is marked similarity between the ED, MD and BD SPs. These similarities and
differences will be borne out in the partitions produced by these SPs. As a result, the CoD-versions of the RVIs are
unlikely to recommend partitions which do not align with the CoD SP, i.e. partitions produced by any of the other
five SPs. This is an issue if a practitioner is using such a fixed-SP evaluation scheme to select between SPs which are
highly unique from one another (as would likely be the case if selecting an optimal SP), as this clearly amplifies the bias
effect. Less bias is likely to be present if there is a high degree of similarity between all of the SPs, but one could argue
that consequently there is significantly less value in comparing them to select the "best" performer, which may at that
point equate to a random decision. Whilst some of the RVIs primarily experience this bias effect for a small subset of
the more unique SPs (consider CI and CHI across all three batteries), others such as SWC, DBI and DI demonstrate
this bias effect regardless of the SP. AUCC in particular appears to be the most susceptible to this. It is the only index
without a median below the expected value for at least one SP on all three batteries.

5.2 Coincidence of EVI and RVI Optima

As described in Section 4 with reference to Table 5, we have recorded a boolean variable, CO, which indicates whether
the optimal value of an RVI coincides with the optimal value of the ARI over a subset of partitions. In order to assess
the k-selection task, CO is computed over a subset of partitions which vary by the number of clusters, with the dataset,
clustering algorithm and SP held static. The corresponding success rates shown in Figures 9a, 9c and 9e are obtained
by averaging these CO values over each of the datasets, clustering algorithms and SPs. Similarly, to assess the SP-
selection task, CO is computed over a subset of partitions which vary by the SP used for clustering, with the dataset,
clustering algorithm and number of clusters held static. The corresponding success rates shown in Figures 9b, 9d and 9f
are obtained by averaging these CO values obtained over each of the datasets, clustering algorithms and numbers of
clusters.

    Firstly we consider the success rates for k-selection on the Vendramin battery. The observed rates in this case are
quite high for all fixed schemes, which is to be expected for a battery with well-separated and compact globular clusters.
However, more suitable distance measures such as ED, MD and ChD still appear to have performed better across all
of the RVIs than CoD and CaD. Interestingly, there doesn't appear to be any notable improvement to the k-selection
success rates when a fixed-SP scheme is replaced by a matching-SP scheme. This observation is consistent across all
three batteries, and also holds for the mean-SP scheme. There appears to be no clear advantage in using the same SP
to compute the RVI as was used to perform the clustering when conducting k-selection.

    The success rates for the Vendramin battery deteriorate significantly when the task shifts to selecting the optimal
SP for the same battery (Figure 9b). For most of the fixed schemes, the rates are halved, or worse, as is the case for
CHI and PBM. Interestingly, whilst CHI and PBM generally performed the best out of all the RVIs for k-selection,
they performed the worst by far for SP-selection. Overall, the mean-SP and matching-SP schemes did not perform
significantly differently from the fixed-SP schemes for this battery on both tasks. The mean-SP scheme was however,
superior to all of its constituent fixed-SP schemes in the case of CI and AUCC on the SP-selection task. Similarly, the
matching-SP scheme was superior to all its constituents for AUCC on the SP-selection task. This was not the case for
any RVIs in the other two batteries on either task.

    For the Gagolewski and UCR batteries, the success rates on the k-selection task were drastically lower than those
of the Vendramin battery. This observation aligns with what is known about the performance of these traditional
indices which weren't designed for more complex, real-world datasets involving clusters with varying densities, overlap
or arbitrary shapes [11]. The success rates by RVI across both tasks are largely consistent for the Gagolewski battery,
with some RVIs (SWC, DI, CHI) showing slightly better performance on k-selection and others (AUCC, CI) showing
slightly better performance on SP-selection. Interestingly however, the SP-selection task on the UCR battery saw
modestly higher success rates for all RVIs other than DI when compared to k-selection. Furthermore, these success rate
improvements were overall higher for the time series specific SPs, such as MSM, than for the generic SPs, such as ED
-- the typical RVI default. However the success rates for SP-selection on both of these batteries were still quite low
overall, generally not in excess of 30%.

    For the Vendramin battery, all RVIs employing a fixed-CaD scheme rejected the standard trend, instead performing
comparatively poorly on the k-selection task and showing only a minor reduction in performance for the SP-selection
task. Furthermore, this scheme had the highest success rate of all the fixed-SP schemes for every RVI on the SP-selection
task. This is likely due to the fact that, as shown in Figure 10, the Canberra distance was most frequently producing
partitions with the largest ARI for the datasets in this battery. And yet, this did not translate into competitive success
rates on the k-selection task. In a similar way, the ranking of medians for the UCR battery SPs in Figure 10 mimicked

                                                                             19
                  100                                                                                             100           ED        BD           ChD      Mean
                                                                                                                   80                                           Match
Success Rate (%)  80                                                                              Success Rate (%) 60           MD        CaD          CoD       CHI PBM
                                                                                                                   40
                  60                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                    0 AUCC
                  40

                  20

                  0                       AUCC  CI  SWC              RDVBII  DI  CHI         PBM                            CI       SWC       RDVBII       DI

                                                    (a) Vendramin (over k)                                                      (b) Vendramin (over SPs)

                  100                                                                                             100           ED        BD           ChD      Mean
                   80                                                                             Success Rate (%) 80           MD        CaD          CoD      Match
Success Rate (%)   60                                                                                              60
                   40                                                                                              40
                   20                           CI  SWC              RDVBII  DI  CHI         PBM                   20       CI       SWC       RDVBII       DI  CHI PBM
                    0                                                                                               0 AUCC

                         AUCC

                                                    (c) Gagolewski (over k)                                                     (d) Gagolewski (over SPs)

                  100                                                                                             100           MSM       TWED         MD       Mean
                   80                                                                             Success Rate (%) 80           SBD       ED           CD       Match
Success Rate (%)   60                                                                                              60           DTW                             CHI PBM
                   40                                                                                              40
                   20                           CI  SWC              RDVBII  DI  CHI         PBM                   20       CI       SWC       RDVBII       DI
                    0                                                                                               0 AUCC

                         AUCC

                                                  (e) UCR (over k)                                                                   (f) UCR (over SPs)
                  100
                                                                                                                  100           MSM       TWED         MD       Mean
                                                                                                  Success Rate (%) 80           SBD       ED           CD       Match
Success Rate (%)  80                                                                                               60           DTW                             CHI PBM
                                                                                                                   40
                  60                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                    0 AUCC
                  40

                  20

                  0                       AUCC  CI  SWC              RDVBII  DI  CHI         PBM                            CI       SWC       RDVBII       DI

                                          (g) UCR (over k with max dataset ARI threshold of 0.6)                    (h) UCR (over SPs with max dataset ARI threshold of 0.6)

Figure 9: The success rates for coincidence of optimal values for ARI and the different versions of each RVI. The first three
rows show the results for each battery, and the left and right columns show the success rates for the k- and SP-selection tasks
respectively. The final row has been produced for a subset of 41 datasets from the UCR archive where at least one of the dataset
partitions had an ARI in excess of 0.6 (see Section 5.4). Note that the legend on the right plot serves both plots in each row.

                                                     Vendramin                   Gagolewski                         UCR                         UCR (ARI Threshold Subset)

                  Proportion Per Dataset  1.0
                                          0.8
                                          0.6
                                          0.4

                                          0.2

                                          0.0                                ED MD BD CaD ChD CoD MSM SBD DTW TWED ED MD CD                   MSM SBD DTW TWED ED MD CD
                                               ED MD BD CaD ChD CoD
                                                                                                   Clustering Distance

Figure 10: The proportion of times each SP generated the optimal partition according to the ARI for various combinations of
clustering algorithm and k for each of the datasets, i.e. which SPs were found to be optimal according to the ARI when producing
Figures 9b, 9d, 9f and 9h.

the ranking of the fixed-SP scheme success rates in Figure 9f, meaning this ranking could just be a chance effect due to
the complexion of datasets within the battery.

                                                                                                  20
5.3 Correlation Analyses

The Pearson correlations between the ARI and all combinations of RVI and evaluation scheme have been summarised
for each of the three batteries in Tables 9 to 11, which use the Viridis colormap (Figure 11) to facilitate interpretation.
Each table presents the median correlations for one battery on first the k-selection task at the top, followed by the SP-
selection task below. Each cell has been obtained by first computing the median of the distribution of correlations across
all variations within an individual dataset, and then computing the median of this distribution across the battery. For
SP-selection, this means that first, a median is computed from 441 correlations (49 numbers of clusters × 9 clustering
algorithms) on all 972 datasets from the Vendramin battery (these distributions are provided in the supplementary
materials). Then the median of these 972 medians is presented in the table. Medians have been employed due to the
skewness of the distributions of correlation values at both levels. The correlations have been rounded to 3 significant
figures, but their relative magnitudes and overall trends are more important than the specific values.

              Figure 11: Reference scale for the Viridis colormap.

                             Evaluation Schemes

 RVI  ED      MD     BD      CaD ChD CoD Mean                              Match

AUCC          Selecting Optimal Partition With Varying k                    0.747
  CI                                                                        0.715
      0.756   0.759  0.747   0.736  0.752        0.748              0.760   0.754
 SWC  0.726   0.726  0.711   0.753  0.703        0.635              0.715   0.485
 DBI  0.764   0.763  0.759   0.786  0.774        0.770              0.772   0.160
  DI  0.492   0.471  0.482   0.537  0.530        0.395              0.471   0.850
 CHI  0.172   0.183  0.180   0.069  0.153        0.204              0.188   0.838
PBM   0.858   0.856  0.858   0.838  0.854        0.731              0.767
      0.850   0.852  0.849   0.759  0.851        0.712              0.853   0.702
AUCC                                                                        0.346
  CI          Selecting Optimal Partition With Varying SP                   0.440
                                                                            0.382
 SWC  0.613   0.658  0.741   0.717  0.616        0.605     0.831            0.057
 DBI  0.524   0.591  0.699   0.677  0.462        0.433     0.804            0.079
  DI  0.621   0.632  0.616   0.671  0.538        0.407     0.654           -0.140
 CHI  0.439   0.533  0.535   0.528  0.196        0.216     0.355
PBM   0.095   0.182  0.377   0.463  -0.028       0.145     0.348
      -0.023  0.021  -0.013  0.456  -0.011       -0.139    -0.136
      0.000   0.048  0.027   0.438  -0.012       -0.093    0.027

Table 9: Median Pearson correlations between the ARI and the different versions of each RVI for the k-selection task
(top) and SP-selection task (bottom) on the Vendramin battery.

                             Evaluation Schemes

 RVI  ED      MD     BD      CaD ChD CoD Mean                              Match

AUCC          Selecting Optimal Partition With Varying k                    0.135
  CI                                                                        0.144
      0.252   0.259  0.265   0.177  0.204        0.285     0.235            0.635
 SWC  0.246   0.217  -0.009  0.390  0.187        -0.138    0.203            0.151
 DBI  0.626   0.627  0.507   0.685  0.595        0.291     0.576            0.170
  DI  0.311   0.356  0.085   0.201  0.261        0.097     0.153            0.479
 CHI  0.217   0.205  0.205   0.138  0.266        0.026     0.253            0.215
PBM   0.527   0.498  0.423   0.459  0.525        0.179     0.330
      0.405   0.491  0.032   0.191  0.454        0.053     0.029            0.296
AUCC                                                                        0.166
  CI          Selecting Optimal Partition With Varying SP                  -0.006
                                                                           -0.146
 SWC  0.544   0.552  0.394   0.283  0.469        -0.124    0.461            0.308
 DBI  0.551   0.547  0.260   0.333  0.512        -0.014    0.526           -0.310
  DI  0.535   0.549  0.485   0.476  0.518        -0.115    0.422           -0.214
 CHI  0.471   0.489  0.389   0.394  0.436        -0.116    -0.087
PBM   0.449   0.488  0.151   0.254  0.463        -0.336    0.454
      0.258   0.206  0.059   0.206  0.238        -0.302    -0.295
      0.252   0.201  0.066   0.206  0.237        -0.303    -0.101

Table 10: Median Pearson correlations between the ARI and the different versions of each RVI for the k-selection task
(top) and SP-selection task (bottom) on the Gagolewski battery.

For both the k- and SP-selection tasks on the Vendramin battery, the matching-SP scheme always performed worse

                             21
than one or multiple of the fixed schemes, including the common RVI default ED. This observation was consistent for
both the Gagolewski and UCR batteries as well. The correlations for the mean-SP scheme were similar to the fixed-SP
and matching-SP schemes for k-selection on the Vendramin battery, but the mean-SP was actually superior to the
matching-SP scheme for most of the RVIs on SP-selection. This is also true for the Gagolewski battery, whilst there
was a high degree of similarity between the two schemes for the UCR battery.

    If we focus on SP-selection for the UCR battery (Table 11), all of the fixed schemes that used generic feature-vector
distances such as MD, CD, and ED (which is the default distance measure for most RVIs) performed much worse than
their time series counterparts, such as MSM, SBD and DTW. As mentioned in Section 3, this is likely due to their
inability to accurately capture the relevant similarity structure within these time series datasets. For a similar reason,
the fixed-CoD scheme has performed poorly on this task for the Gagolewski battery. For the Vendramin and Gagolewski
batteries the ED, MD and ChD fixed schemes all perform quite similarly on both k- and SP-selection, which is to be
expected due to similarities between the distance measures themselves.

    Overall, these observations from the correlation results are largely consistent with observations in the preceding
section concerned with the coincidence of RVI and EVI optima. Indeed if we focus on the Vendramin battery for
a moment, some highly similar observations can be made. For instance, the median correlations overall tend to be
higher for the k-selection task than for the SP-selection task. Furthermore, the mean-SP scheme has a higher median
correlation for the SP-selection task than any of its constituents for AUCC and CI, and the fixed-CaD scheme has
amongst the highest median correlations for all RVIs (notably so for CHI and PBM) on the same task. We also see that
CHI and PBM are the best performing RVIs for the k-selection task, but mostly have median correlations around 0 for
the SP-selection task. However, the correlation results are more damning for the DI on k-selection in all three batteries
than the success rate results, suggesting that the DI does not align well with the ARI for k = k. The DI was also found
to perform quite poorly in other comparative studies [11, 154].

                              Evaluation Schemes

RVI MSM       SBD DTW TWED ED                     MD      CD      Mean Match

              Selecting Optimal Partition With Varying k

AUCC  0.372   0.293   0.368   0.356       0.320   0.345   0.320   0.384   0.312
  CI  0.415   0.413   0.548   0.329       0.169   0.358   0.366   0.436   0.412
      -0.179  -0.228  -0.211  -0.118      -0.265  -0.185  -0.224  -0.246  -0.139
 SWC  -0.179  -0.154  -0.188  -0.169      -0.192  -0.178  -0.175  -0.214  -0.152
 DBI  -0.092  -0.207  -0.134  -0.150      -0.234  -0.147  -0.237  -0.195  -0.126
  DI  -0.107  0.059   0.072   -0.159      -0.148  -0.230  -0.041  -0.013  -0.121
 CHI  -0.479  -0.289  -0.061  -0.509      -0.508  -0.506  -0.269  -0.403  -0.349
PBM

              Selecting Optimal Partition With Varying SP

AUCC  0.450   0.362   0.231   0.127       -0.173  -0.038  -0.173  0.089   0.180
  CI  0.444   0.343   0.232   0.143       -0.147  -0.041  -0.108  0.158   0.216
      0.544   0.359   0.280   0.232       -0.139  0.008   -0.131  0.205   0.207
 SWC  0.099   0.050   0.070   -0.067      -0.297  -0.208  -0.278  -0.044  -0.001
 DBI  0.114   0.066   -0.008  -0.034      -0.216  -0.176  -0.225  -0.087  -0.037
  DI  0.329   0.262   0.236   0.241       -0.004  0.063   -0.054  0.163   0.153
 CHI  0.209   0.188   0.093   0.115       -0.074  0.000   -0.085  0.076   0.061
PBM

Table 11: Median Pearson correlations between the ARI and the different versions of each RVI for the k-selection task
(top) and SP-selection task (bottom) on the UCR battery.

    Different RVIs performed well on the time series data for k-selection compared to the feature-vector data. CHI, PBM
and SWC appeared to perform the best for the Vendramin and Gagolewski batteries. On the UCR battery, AUCC and CI
were the only RVIs that didn't record a negative median correlation, though the median correlations were still relatively
small. This is also of note due to the fact that the failure of MSM, SBD, DTW and TWED to satisfy the identity of
indiscernibles has not negatively impacted the performance of the corresponding fixed-SP schemes for the AUCC on
either task. It should also be noted that there's no indication that prototype-sensitive and prototype-insensitive RVIs
perform very differently on these two tasks for any of the batteries, though we only considered one prototype definition.
The generally low correlation values for the UCR battery make it difficult to recommend using any of these RVIs for
either task when facing complex, real-world datasets, and for the sake of dependability, better alternatives should be
preferred (see Section 6).

   Finally, noting that PBM is the only RVI not invariant to multiplicative scaling, one might consider whether scaling
the pairwise distances for each distance measure to a similar range might improve the correlation for PBM's matching-SP
evaluation scheme. Not all SPs will have distance computations with comparable ranges. For instance, CD and SBD
produce values within the range [0, 2], whilst ED and the flexible time series extension, DTW, both produce values
in the range [0, ]. Even if the range of distance computations is similar for two SPs, this doesn't imply that the
distribution of values within that range will be comparable for a particular dataset. In fact, it should be expected that
DTW values will be concentrated much lower than ED values due to the inherent flexibility of the measure (see left
subfigure in Figure 12). One simple scaling approach could involve dividing all pairwise distances by the maximum

                                      22
                              Evaluation Schemes

RVI MSM       SBD DTW TWED ED                 MD      CD      Mean Match

              Selecting Optimal Partition With Varying k

AUCC  0.620   0.458   0.565   0.512   0.400   0.419   0.400   0.579   0.458
  CI  0.593   0.470   0.693   0.466   0.371   0.442   0.362   0.589   0.497
      0.359   0.187   0.070   0.349   0.088   0.130   0.039   0.161   0.181
 SWC  -0.074  -0.109  -0.128  -0.079  -0.207  -0.221  -0.187  -0.191  -0.092
 DBI  0.000   -0.188  0.000   -0.018  -0.241  -0.080  -0.252  -0.028  -0.000
  DI  0.004   0.193   0.263   0.013   -0.041  -0.005  0.095   0.096   0.085
 CHI  -0.436  -0.048  0.096   -0.512  -0.473  -0.474  -0.080  -0.256  -0.210
PBM

              Selecting Optimal Partition With Varying SP

AUCC  0.667   0.560   0.442   0.428   0.099   0.148   0.099   0.466   0.465
  CI  0.750   0.552   0.472   0.515   0.094   0.157   -0.055  0.497   0.362
      0.736   0.618   0.565   0.541   0.230   0.280   0.185   0.609   0.319
 SWC  0.259   0.269   0.277   -0.011  -0.285  -0.143  -0.195  0.047   0.093
 DBI  0.415   0.200   0.273   0.197   -0.021  -0.002  -0.038  0.104   0.044
  DI  0.498   0.293   0.297   0.412   -0.006  0.199   -0.084  0.291   0.169
 CHI  0.309   0.233   0.216   0.223   -0.040  0.062   -0.039  0.182   0.198
PBM

Table 12: Median Pearson correlations between the ARI and the different versions of each RVI for the k-selection
task (top) and SP-selection task (bottom) on the 41 datasets from the UCR battery which have at least one partition
achieving an ARI > 0.6.

pairwise distance, ensuring all values range between 0 and 1. Another approach adopted in [39] scaled the distance
matrices by the "global dispersion". Each pairwise distance was divided by the sum of all deviations from the global (or
grand) prototype, which for PBM would have the effect of removing E1 from Equation (2). These two simple scaling
approaches, hereon referred to as maximum and global scaling respectively, are illustrated for ED and DTW with the
Trace dataset in Figure 12. To assess their impact on correlations, we applied them to the evaluation distances used in
the matching-SP scheme for the PBM index.

Figure 12: Log-scaled histograms of the strict upper triangle for two distance measures computed on the Trace dataset. The raw
distance values are shown in the left-hand plot, and have been scaled using the maximum value for the middle plot, and using
the global dispersion for the right-hand plot.

    For the Vendramin battery, both modes of scaling caused a slight improvement in the performance of PBM when
selecting the optimal SP. The median correlations for the maximum and global scaling methods increased from -0.140,
to 0.063 and 0.062 respectively. This outcome was not repeated in the more difficult batteries. For the Gagolewski
battery, scaling reduced the already meagre median correlation from -0.214, to -0.321 and -0.230 respectively. For the
UCR battery, an improvement was only noted for maximum scaling (from 0.061 to 0.087), whilst global scaling resulted
in a reduction (0.048). In any case, scaling does not appear to have a significant impact on the correlation for the PBM
index when using a matching evaluation scheme.

5.4 Minimum EVI Requirements

It is noteworthy that studies utilising the UCR archive for benchmarking the performance of existing clustering algo-
rithms [79] or justifying the introduction of novel clustering approaches [51] often display extremely low ground-truth
recovery rates for many of the datasets. Observing the correlation or coincidence rates between RVI and EVI values for
a dataset where none of the clustering approaches managed to recover any meaningful clustering structure related to
the ground-truth labels is of questionable value. If a broad range of different clustering approaches have been applied to
such datasets, it is likely that the ground-truth labels are not discoverable for any "off-the-shelf" clustering method that
may be reasonably applied in practical circumstances. It is conceivable that a specialist distance measure or algorithm
could be constructed to perfectly separate the clusters into the groupings observed in the ground-truth data, but this
would defeat the need to apply any clustering approach.

                                                                             23
    In [79], ARI and AMI values are computed for 8 partitions, each of which is produced by a different clustering
approach, for the same 112 UCR datasets used in this paper. Figure 13 displays the number of datasets where at
least one of the 8 corresponding ARIs and AMIs were in excess of the threshold value on the x-axis. The same has
been plotted for the 693 partitions generated in this study from each combination of 7 distance measures, 9 clustering
algorithms and 11 numbers of clusters. Very few datasets in [79] had any partitions discovered with even a modicum of
similarity to the ground-truth labels. In fact, Figure 13 shows that 42 (i.e. 112 - 70) datasets had no partitions with
ARI values in excess of 0.2, while only 7 datasets had an ARI in excess of above 0.9. However the breadth of partitions
in our study affords only marginal improvements, suggesting that the issue is indeed with the meaningfulness of the
ground-truth labels for clustering purposes.

               110                                                                            Javed et al. 2020 [79]       ARI

               100                                                                            Current Study                AMI

               90

               80

ARI            70

                Number of Datasets60

                                                                                  AMI50

               40

               30

               20

               10

                   00.0  0.1                 0.2 T0h.3reshold0.V4alue (M0.5inimum0.E6 VI Valu0.e7) 0.8                0.9       1.0

Figure 13: The number of datasets from the UCR archive clustered in [79] where at least one of their 8 included clustering
approaches produced a partition whose ARI or AMI exceeded the threshold values along the x-axis. A similar analysis is provided
for the partitions from the present study.

1.0                                                  Replacement                       1.0                                                   Replacement

0.9                                                  Shuffling                         0.9                                                   Shuffling

0.8                                                                                    0.8

0.7                                                                                    0.7

0.6                                                                                    0.6

0.5                                                                                    0.5

0.4                                                                                    0.4

0.3                                                                                    0.3

0.2                                                                                    0.2

0.1                                                                                    0.1

0.0 0  10  20  30        40 Perce5n0tage 60  70  80  90 100                            0.0 0  10  20  30     40 Perce5n0tage 60      70  80  90 100

                         (a) ARI                                                                             (b) AMI

Figure 14: For each dataset in the UCR Archive, a percentage of the ground-truth class labels were selected and either shuffled
or replaced uniformly at random to create a new labelling. The figures plot the a) ARI and b) AMI values computed between
these two partitions across all datasets and with 100 repetitions.

    In [56], the authors consider how well RVIs concur with expert knowledge as represented by ground truth labels.
They generate a large number of partitions for each of their datasets and observed that some datasets were inherently
hard to cluster, with no algorithm producing partitions that matched the ground truth labels well. They specifically
refer to three datasets which had maximum ARIs of 0.036, 0.181 and 0.401. Moreover, as part of their phased evalu-
ation framework, [79] excluded datasets with an ARI < 0.05 from winning tally counts, acknowledging that this was
approaching randomness.

    Whilst there is a multitude of ways that clustering partitions could score low ARIs, for some basic intuition consider

                                                                  24
Figure 14, where ARI and AMI values have been computed for versions of the UCR ground truth labellings that have been
tampered with to varying degrees. Multiple random subsets, whose size was determined according to the percentages
shown on the x-axis, were selected from the ground truth labels and either shuffled or replaced with uniformly random
labels without changing the number of clusters. Based on the observations in Figure 14, an ARI < 0.05 equates to over
80% of the ground-truth labels being shuffled or replaced. We consider this threshold insufficient for our purposes, and
instead suggest an ARI of 0.6 would be more appropriate. This would equate to no more than 25% of the ground-truth
labels having been shuffled or replaced, which is still a significant degradation of the ground-truth clustering.

    It should be noted that there is likely a difference in terms of the discovered structure between a partition achieving
an ARI of 0.2 for a dataset where the best partition scored over 0.9, compared to a dataset where 0.2 is achieved by
the best partition. The former can occur for instance where the ground-truth clusters have been split into a sufficient
number of subclusters hierarchically. In the latter case it is likely that the ground-truth labels are not discoverable, or
that there is no discoverable clustering structure to the data. Figure 15a presents a histogram of the maximum ARI
values achieved for each dataset from the three batteries. All apart from two of the 972 Vendramin datasets have at least
one partition returning an ARI of 1.0. The two exceptions both have a maximum ARI of 0.996. The Gagolewski battery
is also mostly composed of datasets with recoverable labels, with at least one partition for 54/57 datasets achieving a
maximum ARI above 0.6, and the remaining three having maxima of 0.560, 0.261 and 0.460. As revealed in Figure 13,
the UCR battery is much less dependable.

    By applying a threshold requiring at least one partition have an ARI in excess of 0.6 to the UCR battery, we obtain
a subset of 41 datasets. The resulting distribution of ARI values for this subset is shown in Figure 15b alongside the
other batteries. The ARI values of this subset still cover the same range as the full UCR battery, but is notably less
right skewed. The coincidence and correlation analyses in Sections 5.2 and 5.3 have been reproduced for this subset and
are presented in Figures 9g and 9h and Table 12 respectively.

    As could be expected, the exclusion of datasets without clustering structure or non-discoverable labels results in
improvements in the overall success rates. For the SP-selection success rates, it is noteworthy that the fixed-MSM
scheme appears to pull further ahead of the other fixed schemes for most of the RVIs. This is likely due to the fact
that MSM was responsible for more of the maximal ARI partitions (32%) than the other distance measures (17% for
the next closest). This means that the MSM SP is optimally capturing the similarity structure in more of the datasets.
With most of the RVIs the fixed-MSM scheme also demonstrated a clear bias towards partitions produced with MSM
for the UCR archive (Figure 8c).

100                                                                                                                   UUGVeCCangRRdo(rlTaehmwrseinksihold)
Percentage of Datasets (%)                                                25
                                            Percentage of Partitions (%)
80                                                                        20

60                                                                        15

40                                                                        10

20                                                                        5

0 0.0 0.2 0.4ARI0.6 0.8 1.0                                               0 0.2  0.0      0.2  0.A4RI       0.6  0.8  1.0

     (a) Maximum ARI                                                                           (b) All ARI

     Figure 15: Histograms of (a) the maximum ARI value per dataset, and (b) ARI values for every partition.

    Significant improvements to the median correlations were also observed for many combinations of RVIs and evaluation
schemes. Notably, the k-selection median correlations for SWCMSM improved by 0.538. Interestingly, DBI, DI and PBM
still showed extremely poor correlations for this task. These also happen to be three indices which were not encouraged
for use with non-Euclidean data and distance measures (see Appendix A). The SP-selection median correlations for the
mean-SP scheme improved more significantly than for the matching-SP scheme, bringing the relationship between the
two schemes more in line with observations for the other two batteries.

6 Discussion

Our experiments were designed to probe for answers to three main questions:
  (i) Do RVIs equipped with a fixed-SP evaluation scheme demonstrate an observable bias towards partitions generated
       from clustering approaches employing the same SP?
  (ii) Is there a difference in reliability between the fixed-SP, matching-SP and mean-SP evaluation schemes for either
       of the SP- or k-selection tasks?

 (iii) Are RVIs as reliable for SP-selection as they are for their conventional application of k-selection?
    We now address each of these questions in turn, drawing on the experimental results presented in Section 5.

                                                                                      25
(i) Bias in Fixed-SP Evaluation Schemes

Our experimental results provide strong evidence for the existence of a bias effect in fixed-SP evaluation schemes. None
of the seven RVIs conformed with the behaviour expected in the absence of bias, as demonstrated by their failure to
produce distributions of OWM values symmetrically distributed around the expected value of 1/N. For all of the
RVIs, the extent of this bias effect manifested non-uniformly across the different SPs. Notably, certain fixed-SP schemes
consistently yielded the optimal value across the considered fixed-SP versions of some RVIs -- regardless of the SP used
for clustering. This different sort of bias effect was most pronounced for the more unique SPs within the candidate set,
such as the cosine distance in the Vendramin and Gagolewski batteries. This observation suggests that practitioners
face greater bias effects when selecting between diverse SPs compared to choosing among more similar ones. Such
bias amplification can lead to certain SPs being artificially favoured, regardless of their actual suitability to the data.
These findings strongly suggest that practitioners should avoid the use of fixed-SP evaluation schemes for SP-selection,
particularly when comparing fundamentally different SPs.

(ii) Comparison of Evaluation Schemes

For SP-selection, our analysis revealed no clear advantage in using any particular evaluation scheme. The matching-
SP scheme consistently demonstrated similar or inferior success rates and correlations compared to fixed-SP schemes
across all three batteries. The mean-SP scheme performed similarly, showing no systematic improvement over fixed-SP
approaches.

    The relative performance of different fixed-SP schemes for SP-selection varied based on the nature of the data. Recall
that in Section 3 it was suggested that a fixed-SP evaluation scheme would be effective for SP-selection only if the ideal
SP was used to compute the RVI. This was borne out in our experimental results. For time series datasets in the UCR
battery, fixed schemes using time series-specific SPs, such as MSM, outperformed those using generic feature-vector
SPs like ED (the typical RVI default). Similarly, for the Vendramin and Gagolewski batteries, fixed schemes using SPs
better-suited to the data tended to perform better -- for instance, the Canberra distance showed higher success rates
for the Vendramin battery, aligning with its tendency to produce partitions with the largest ARI for these datasets.
However, these marginal improvements are difficult to reconcile with the biases observed for fixed-SP schemes and the
requirement to know which SP is best suited to the data a priori.

    Regarding k-selection, we found that there was no obvious advantage when employing any of the three evaluation
schemes. Thus, based on our discussion in Section 3, we suggest practitioners use the same SP for evaluation that was
used for clustering when comparing partitions from different clustering algorithms with different numbers of clusters.
This ensures that conclusions are consistent with the spatial embedding of the dataset used to obtain the partitions.

(iii) Reliability of RVIs for SP-selection

RVIs were found to be much less reliable for SP-selection than k-selection on well-behaved datasets with well-separated
and compact globular clusters, such as those found in the Vendramin battery. For these datasets, success rates for
SP-selection were typically half or less of those for k-selection. Furthermore, an RVI's proficiency at k-selection on this
battery did not predict proficiency in SP-selection, with some top-performing indices for k-selection showing markedly
poor results in SP-selection. This was particularly evident for CHI and PBM, which performed exceptionally well
for k-selection but showed markedly poor performance in SP-selection, with success rates dropping dramatically and
correlations hovering around zero.

    The findings weren't as clear for the batteries featuring datasets with more real-world complexity. For the Gagolewski
and UCR batteries, the success rates and correlations on the k-selection task were drastically lower than those for the
Vendramin battery. This observation aligns with known limitations of these seven traditional indices when encountering
real-world data or complex datasets involving clusters with varying densities, overlap, or arbitrary shapes [11]. The
success rates and correlations for SP-selection were largely consistent with those for k-selection on the Gagolewski
battery, with some RVIs (SWC, DI, CHI) showing slightly better performance on k-selection and others (AUCC, CI)
showing slightly better performance on SP-selection. Interestingly, the SP-selection task on the UCR battery revealed a
contrasting pattern, with modestly higher success rates for most RVIs compared to k-selection. As previously mentioned,
these improvements were particularly pronounced when using time series-specific SPs rather than generic feature-vector
SPs. This advantage was also reflected in higher correlations for these cases. However, it is important to note that
the absolute success rates for SP-selection on both the Gagolewski and UCR batteries remained quite low overall --
generally not exceeding 30%.

6.1 Recommendations

The authors interpret these observations as strong evidence for the unsuitability of RVIs to the SP-selection task when
using any of the evaluation schemes considered. A breadth of more appropriate, reliable tools and strategies exist for
selecting an SP which will either be "good enough" for an exploratory analysis, or optimal in some particular concrete
sense. We have gathered some of these alternatives that circulate in the literature and will discuss them in the remainder
of this section.

                                                                             26
Matching Data Characteristics

This first alternative involves selecting a subset of relevant SPs whose features and characteristics align with those of
the dataset and the domain under analysis. This is an obvious first step for any practitioner wanting to effectively
cluster their data. Whilst this approach will likely not prove sufficient to make a final selection of one SP, it is useful
for narrowing the field of candidates. For example, a Shapelet representation [174] may be appropriate where time
series contain extraneous data, are of variable lengths or have missing data. However, Shapelets are less likely to
be effective in situations where features or events should be aligned within the time domain. Coordinating dataset
and SP characteristics can also be useful for reducing the range of candidate parameters for a given representation or
distance. For instance, if it is important that the clustering process focus on events closely aligned in time, then a
heavily constrained version of DTW may be appropriate with a small warping window.

    Each dataset or clustering problem will come with a unique set of characteristics, and if these are considered in
conjunction with the requirements of the clustering, the range of candidate SPs and their parameters can be reason-
ably reduced. Some research has attempted to formalise this relationship between datasets and specifically clustering
algorithms [49, 121, 80] by drawing upon the meta-learning literature [138]. Meta-learning uses dataset-level features
to learn a mapping between datasets and algorithms, allowing for the automatic recommendation of appropriate algo-
rithms for unseen datasets on a range of different data mining tasks. The authors are not aware of any research that has
attempted to define meta-features for the recommendation of different similarity paradigms for clustering. The breadth
of datasets, and methods, that would be required to train a useful, widely applicable meta-model make this approach
to SP-selection impractical without a concerted effort in this direction.

Visualisation

An obvious second alternative that can be useful for comparing SPs is visualisation. This alternative is especially
practical for time series data -- albeit limited in scope by the length and number of time series. Dimensionality
reduction techniques such as PCA, tSNE and MDS can also make visualisation possible for high-dimensional feature-
vector data, though they are prone to information loss, with preservation of clustering structures not guaranteed [110].
Furthermore, such visualisations can quickly become overwhelming for SP-selection if the number of competing methods
is large. Especially if k is unknown and multiple clustering algorithms are being considered. The visual assessment of
clustering tendency [90, 161, 21] is another form of visual evaluation which can be useful for determining whether a
candidate SP has been able to capture any clustering structure in a dataset.

External Validation with High Quality, Application Specific Labeled Datasets

The third alternative involves comparing SPs using external validation against labelled datasets. Strong performance
in a benchmark study (such as [79]) across datasets from a multitude of domains is certainly grounds to consider an
SP as a candidate, but it should not be assumed that this performance will necessarily extrapolate to novel datasets
[169]. This approach specifically requires high quality, domain and problem specific labelled datasets, which may be
real or synthetic. This calibre of labelled dataset is typically not readily available, and can be difficult or expensive to
procure, often requiring the involvement of domain experts. Real world datasets could be labelled fully by hand, or
partial labellings could be propagated through the dataset. External validation against such datasets can result in a
useful selection bias towards SPs that align with those cluster concepts included by the expert. However this could also
lead to clustering approaches that will overlook some fruitful, unanticipated groupings in new datasets. In lieu of real
labelled datasets, synthetically generated datasets can also be effective [66]. In this case, there is a balance that needs to
be struck between realistic complexity and reliability of cluster labels [87]. Conditional generative adversarial networks
are a promising recent advancement that can be adapted for the production of credible synthetic labelled feature vector
and time series datasets [175, 137, 122].

Application Targeted Evaluation

The final alternative we consider is born of a clustering philosophy which differs subtly from the typical exploratory
philosophy. This philosophy declares that clustering methodologies cannot be evaluated effectively in isolation from
some clustering objective [65, 109]. It was noted in [94] that when selecting distance measures for clustering, optimal
performance according to internal validation with RVIs doesn't necessarily translate to optimal performance in down-
stream application tasks. This idea is over 100 years old [157], as [103] claims: "The nature of the classification that
we make . . . must have direct regard to the purpose for which the classification is required. In as far as it serves the
purpose, the classification is a good classification, however `artificial' it may be. In as far as it does not serve this
purpose, it is a bad classification, however `natural' it may be."

    The authors of [157] identify that much of the disagreement and uncertainty around clustering evaluation and
comparison is a side-effect of the diversity of problems for which we rely on clustering. They advocate for the construction
of a taxonomy of clustering problems. For example, one clustering problem might be to define categories for subsequent
use in a data processing pipeline, while another might be to validate a hypothesis about groupings in the data, and yet
another could be to model the data generating processes for groups of objects. They argue that these different problems

                                                                             27
will require their own domain-dependent evaluation procedures and that interactions between statisticians and domain
experts cannot be overlooked in this process.

    This philosophy of application specificity can modestly guide evaluation [67], as is the case for [73]: "Our intended
applications mainly use clustering for pattern or representative discovery, so we find suitable validity methods that focus
on representativeness or give an important role to the representatives." In the extreme, this philosophy has guided the
creation of novel optimisation criteria. One such example comes from the interval meter time series clustering literature,
where indirect observations of the error on downstream forecasting applications are used as an indication of relative
clustering quality [31, 146, 143]. For other examples of novel evaluation criteria, see [40, 149].

    Despite the obvious benefit of specificity providing concrete grounds for comparison between SPs, this approach still
suffers from varying degrees of subjectivity, sensitivity and expert bias. Furthermore, not every application of clustering
has goals that translate so concretely into objective functions. However, we encourage practitioners to examine whether
their specific application could allow for such tangible evaluation criteria.

7 Conclusion

Relative validity indices are the most widely used tool for clustering evaluation, but it is critical to understand their
limitations. Originally suggested as an aid for selecting the optimal partition from amongst a set which vary by the
number of clusters or the responsible clustering algorithm, RVIs have increasingly been used to compare the clustering
performance of different similarity paradigms -- that is, to select optimal distance measures, representation methods,
normalisation procedures, and their parameterisations. Our comprehensive investigation demonstrates that RVIs are
not well-suited for this task, a finding that should not be surprising given that it was never their intended purpose. This
finding is particularly significant given the widespread and often unchallenged use of RVIs for this purpose in current
research.

    Through extensive experimentation involving over 2.7 million clustering partitions, we have established several crucial
findings regarding the use of RVIs for SP-selection. Firstly, fixed-SP evaluation schemes exhibit clear bias towards
partitions generated using the same SP, with this effect amplified when comparing SPs with fundamentally different
formulations. Secondly, RVIs demonstrate lower reliability for SP-selection compared to k-selection, with some top-
performing indices for k-selection showing the poorest results for SP-selection. Thirdly, matching-SP and mean-SP
evaluation schemes not only fail to offer meaningful advantages over fixed-SP schemes, but bear their own limitations.
These observations should not be viewed as isolated to the seven RVIs examined in this study; rather, they likely extend
to other RVIs given the fundamental nature of the limitations identified. The success of RVIs in choosing the best SP
should be viewed as an exception, rather than the rule.

    Based on these findings, we recommend that RVIs only be used to rank or select optimal partitions from collections
produced using the same SP -- where the partitions in the collection may differ only by their numbers of clusters
or the responsible clustering algorithm. For this purpose our results suggest that the choice between fixed Euclidean
and matching evaluation schemes is unlikely to significantly impact performance, as both performed similarly in our
experiments for k-selection across all batteries. Nevertheless, for more meaningful evaluations we recommend using the
matching-SP scheme to ensure that the RVI is exposed to the same similarity structure used to obtain the partitions.

    Our main recommended alternatives for SP-selection are necessarily application-specific, aligning with the long-
standing but often overlooked principle that clustering evaluation cannot be meaningfully separated from its intended
purpose. The caveat with these alternatives is that they require more effort from practitioners, though we believe that
this additional complexity is warranted given the demonstrated unreliability of RVI-based approaches. These alternatives
include: carefully selecting SPs based on dataset characteristics and domain requirements; using visualisation techniques
where feasible; validating against high quality, domain-specific labelled data; and evaluating SPs based on concrete
application objectives. While none of these alternatives offers the simplicity of RVI-based evaluation, they provide more
reliable and meaningful paths to SP-selection. We particularly emphasise the importance of considering the specific
purpose motivating the use of clustering, as the optimal SP for one application may not be suitable for another, even
within the same domain.

    We also advocate for the adoption of some standard terminology to describe clustering approaches which may com-
bine different normalisation procedures, representation methods, distance measures, clustering algorithms and prototype
definitions. Without distinguishing between a clustering algorithm and a clustering approach, it is all too easy for prac-
titioners to fall for the pernicious misconception exemplified in [10] where it is suggested that the SWC is "independent
of the clustering technique". This is true for clustering algorithms, but not of clustering approaches, where the SP can
vary. Similarly, where ambiguous, we encourage practitioners to explicitly state which SP was used when computing
RVIs for k-selection -- either the default Euclidean or the matching SP. For those who persist with using RVIs for SP
selection, we urge them to clearly indicate whether a fixed-SP or matching-SP evaluation scheme was employed. Such
transparency would also be advisable for software packages offering RVI implementations.

    This work should not be viewed as a criticism of previous research that has used RVIs for SP comparison. Instead,
it serves as a careful examination of a widely-adopted practice. While it was outside the scope of the current study to
develop novel methodologies, we hope our findings will inspire the research community to pursue more robust approaches
to SP-selection, moving beyond the current reliance on tools that are inadequate for this critical task.

                                                                             28
Appendix A. Relative Validity Indices

In this section we provide details regarding the computation of each RVI used within our experiments and explore
their original scope and intended purposes. As mentioned in Section 2.4, the RVIs have been split into two categories:
prototype-sensitive and prototype-insensitive.

Notation

First we shall establish some notation. Suppose we have obtained a hard partition of a set S = {x1, x2, . . . , xN }, given

by C = {C1, C2, ..., Ck}. Whilst the xi could represent any generic object to be clustered (for which we can define a

dissimilarity function), we consider xi  Rn as the data encountered in this paper was restricted to feature vectors and

time series. Note that the hard partition C satisfies     k    Cj  =  S,  Cj      =    and  Cj   C  =    for  j  =  .  Furthermore,  let
                                                          j=1

cj denote the prototype of cluster Cj and c denote the prototype of S, i.e. the grand prototype. Note also that |Cj|

represents the number of objects in Cj, also known as the cardinality of the set Cj.

These RVIs all require some computation of distances either between objects, between prototypes or between objects

and prototypes. In the experiments, many different dissimilarity measures were used for this purpose. For the sake of

consistency, the notation d(·, ·) will be used to represent any generic distance measure between the xi. These distances
will not necessarily fulfil all of the conditions of a strict metric, in particular for time series distance measures where the

triangle inequality or identity of indiscernibles are often violated.

Prototype-Insensitive RVIs

Silhouette Width Criterion (SWC) Probably the most popular RVI, the SWC is given by a summation of indi-

vidual scores computed for each object being clustered. Compactness is quantified by considering the average distance

of each object to all of the other objects in the same cluster. Similarly, separation is quantified as the average distance

of each object to all of the objects in the nearest cluster. Formally, consider xi  Cj, and define aj,i as the average

distance of xi to every other object in Cj. Also define bj,i = min,=j d,i, where d,i is the average distance of xi to

every other object in a different cluster C. The Silhouette score for xi is then computed as the normalised difference

between these two average distances,

                                      sxi              =     bj,i - aj,i       .
                                                          max{aj,i, bj,i}

These scores can be considered per object or per cluster, as is the case for Silhouette plots, or can be averaged over all

xi  S to produce,

                                                               1N
                                      SWC =                             sxi .
                                                  N
                                                                   i=1

The SWC is a maximisation criterion, as bj,i should be maximised and aj,i should be minimised. Further, if Cj is a
singleton cluster, i.e. |Cj| = 1, sxi := 0 in order to prevent the trivial solution of k = N being recommended. Whilst
the original SWC is prototype-insensitive, some variants are not. A popular variant known as the simplified SWC

[69] replaces the computation of average distances between objects with distances between objects and relevant cluster

prototypes.

In [85] it is offered that SWC values above 0.7 suggest the discovery of strong clusters, values from 0.51 - 0.7

reasonable clusters, 0.26 - 0.5 weak or artifical clusters and that no clusters have been found for values less than 0.25.

In practice however, these ranges should be interpreted with caution. One reason is that a homogeneous dataset with

a single far enough outlier could be regarded as a strong clustering structure. Furthermore, recall that it was suggested

in Section 3 that RVIs based on unique SPs should be recognised as independent statistics. Such proposed ranges are

thus virtually meaningless when comparing partitions produced with different SPs, as the exact same partition could

have a SWC above 0.7 and below 0.5 according to different SPs (see the Plane dataset in Figure 6).

In the original paper [129], it was suggested that the SWC could suitably be applied to any ratio-scale dissimilarities,

with Euclidean distance used as an example. This preserves the invariance of the SWC to multiplicative scaling of

the pairwise distance matrix. It is also touted as an advantage that the SWC only depends on the dissimilarities and

the partition. As a result of this, the authors suggest that the SWC is suitable for comparing partitions produced by

different algorithms, with different numbers of clusters.

Dunn Index (DI) A popular index which takes the general form:

                                                               min j,
                                                          j= {1,...,k}
                                      DI =                                     ,
                                                               max j
                                                           j{1,...,k}

                                                                                                                                                           th

where j, is a set distance between clusters j and , and j is the diameter of the j cluster. Originally j, was defined

as the distance between the closest two objects in Cj and C, and j was defined as the distance between the furthest

objects in Cj, i.e.

                     j, = min {d (xh, xi)} , j = max {d (xh, xi)}
                     xhCj , xiC                                           xhCj , xiCj

                                                               29
    Many variants of the DI exist which involve different definitions of the set distance and diameter in order to correct
for sensitivity to outliers [20, 154]. This particular set distance is actually the single linkage definition of set distance
commonly encountered in agglomerative hierarchical clustering. The set distance is a measure of separation between
any two clusters, while diameter is a measure of cluster compactness. The ratio of these quantities means that the DI
is also a maximisation criterion.

    In the original paper [46], the data were assumed to derive from a general real inner product space with an induced
metric. The index is suggested for determining the optimal partition from a family of "k-partitions" of the same form
as C. This index has since been commonly applied for comparing partitions produced by different algorithms, with
different numbers of clusters [20].

C-Index (CI) The CI compares the sum of all within-group distances () with a worst and best case scenario. If

there  is  a  total  of    =  1  k    |Cj  |  (|Cj  |  -  1)  within-group  distances,  these    two  extremes  are  computed  by  sorting,  in
                              2  j=1

ascending order, all of the non-trivial pairwise distances and summing the first and last  distances for the best (min )

and worst (max ) cases respectively. The index is then computed as

                                                              CI =        - min   .

                                                                     max  - min 

Note that  is the sum of all off-diagonal terms in the upper triangle of the pairwise distance matrix which correspond

to objects that share a cluster, i.e.

                                                              N -1 N

                                                          =              I(h, i) · d (xh, xi) ,

                                                              h=1 i=h+1

where

                                                    1         if xh and xi are in the same cluster,
                                      I(h, i) =
                                                          0 if xh and xi are in different clusters.

According to the CI, better partitions will produce values of  closer to min , hence the CI is a minimisation criterion.
    From [22]: "The C-index...was introduced in 1970 as a way to define and identify a best crisp partition on n objects..."

The original paper [35] suggests the CI in the context of free-recall clustering. The theory and application space of this
index was not addressed in this paper. Rather it was subsequently discussed in [72], [71] and [22]. The CI readily accepts
a generic distance matrix, though formalisations are often prepared with the assumption of an induced norm in a vector
space [22]. It is implied that the CI is capable of comparing partitions with different numbers of clusters, but it is not
explicitly suggested that partitions from different algorithms should or should not be compared.

Area Under Curve for Clustering (AUCC) The AUCC [77] is a linear transformation of Baker and Hubert's
Gamma criterion [16] with a superior computational complexity. It is also the only RVI we are aware of which has
incorporated a theoretical expected value for random clusterings - something typically only accounted for in the context
of external clustering evaluation. The AUCC makes use of the Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristics Curve
(AUC-ROC), a popular supervised learning performance measure. By representing a clustering partition as a binary
relation between objects, and normalising the pairwise distance matrix to range between 0 and 1, the clustering problem
can be recast in a format compatible with a typical ROC analysis. The normalised dissimilarity values correspond
to classification thresholds, and the corresponding binary labels are treated as the true classes. AUCC is thus a
maximisation criterion ranging between 0 and 1. The expected value under a relevant null model of random clusterings
is 0.5, regardless of k or cluster imbalances. It should also be noted that solutions under-estimating k are penalised
more heavily than solutions over-estimating k.

    In the original paper [77], it is suggested that the AUCC is defined for objects embedded in a space where a
dissimilarity measure between objects can be defined which adheres to non-negativity, identity of indiscernibles and
symmetry. Interestingly, the authors also suggest that the dissimilarity used to compute the AUCC "must be the very
same (or equivalent) to the one employed during the clustering phase". The experiments performed in [77] suggest
the authors support the use of the AUCC for comparing partitions produced by different clustering algorithms, with
different numbers of clusters.

Prototype-Sensitive RVIs

Calinski-Harabasz Index (CHI)                 This index is also referred to as the Variance Ratio Criterion (VRC), and is
computed as,

                                                                     Tr (B) N - k       ,
                                                              CHI =          ×
                                                                     Tr (W) k - 1

where Tr(·) is the trace of a matrix, and B and W are the n × n between-cluster and within-cluster dispersion matrices
respectively. Separation is quantified as the sum of between-cluster variances, given by Tr (B), while the sum of within-
cluster variances, given by Tr (W ), measures compactness. Hence this is a maximisation criterion. The normalisation

                                                                         30
term prevents the index from monotonically increasing with k. Computing these traces is done in the original formulation
without obtaining the full matrices by using the following:

                                                               N                                           k

Tr (B) = Tr (T) - Tr (W) , Tr (T) = d(xi, c)p , Tr (W) =                                                         d(xi, cj)p ,

                                                               i=1                                     j=1 xiCj

where p = 2 and d(·, ·) is the ED. In order to make the CHI generically applicable to non-Euclidean measures, we have
used a variant with p = 1. This is consistent with the presentation of this option to users in the WeightedCluster
package [141] implementation for , and the formulation presented for community mining evaluation in [123].

    In the original paper [27], it is acknowledged that their proposed method could be extended to instances where
the points are not from an ordinary Euclidean space. If only a measure of pairwise distances between objects can
be established, then the objects can be meaningfully subjected to cluster analysis with the VRC. It is not explicitly
suggested that the CHI can be used to compare partitions from different algorithms, but it is recommended as an informal
indicator of the "best number" of clusters. They acknowledge that this is in spite of any satisfactory probabilistic theory
justifying such a use, and rather due to the CHI displaying desirable mathematical properties. The authors pragmatically
suggest choosing the value of k where the CHI demonstrates either an absolute maxima, early local maxima or at least
a comparatively rapid increase.

Davies-Bouldin Index (DBI) Where the CHI is a ratio of sums, the DBI is a sum of ratios. It is defined as follows,

                                                                        1k        Dj ,
                                                               DBI =
                                                                          k  j=1

where Dj = maxj=  {Dj,}, Dj, = d¯j + d¯ /dj, is the within-to-between cluster spread for clusters Cj and C, d¯j and
d¯ are the average within-cluster distances of Cj and C respectively, and dj, is the distance between those two clusters.
Explicitly,

                                         d¯j  =   1            d(xi, cj),    and  dj, = d (cj , c) .                                            (1)
                                                 |Cj |
                                                        xi Cj

The smaller the values of Dj, the smaller the worst within-to-between cluster spread involving cluster C, hence DBI is
a minimisation criterion.

    In the original paper [38], the DBI is proposed in terms of the Minkowski family of distance metrics. The authors
explicitly state that the DBI "can be used to compare the validity of data partitions regardless of how those partitions
were generated." Subsequently they only ever refer to partitions varying in terms of clustering algorithms and numbers
of clusters. It is unlikely that they were advocating for the DBI to be used to compare partitions from different SPs.

Pakhira-Bandyopadhyay-Mauli Index (PBM) The PBM for a partition is given by,

                                                        PBM =        1       DK   E1    p                                                       (2)
                                                                     k       EK
                                                                                          .

PBM uses the maximum distance between cluster prototypes to measure the separation of the clustering, given by

DK = maxj,{1,2,...,k} d(cj, c). Cluster compactness is summarised by the Ek term, which denotes the sum of distances

to each object's cluster prototype, i.e. EK =           k      xiCj d(xi, cj). E1 denotes the sum of distances to the grand
                                                        j=1

prototype, i.e. E1 =    N    d(xi,  c).  In   the  original  paper,  p  =    2,   but   as  for  CHI,  we  have  chosen  to  set  p  =  1  for  general
                        i=1

applicability to non-Euclidean distance measures. As DK should be maximised and EK minimised, PBM is another

maximisation criteria.

The original paper [117] suggests the index is capable of selecting the optimal number of clusters for an "underlying

clustering technique". The index is explained and decisions justified with reference to spherical cluster concepts in

Euclidean space. A vector norm notation is also utilised without any indication that this could be extended to other

distance measures. It should be noted that PBM is the only index we considered that is not scale-invariant, and this

is due to the normalisation by E1. This term was dropped in [123], but has been retained here to be faithful to the

original formulation, and to observe the performance of a scale-variant RVI. Whilst invariance was expressly advertised

for the SWC, all of DI, CI, AUCC, CHI and DBI are also invariant to multiplicative scaling.

References

   [1] Hossein Abbasimehr and Mostafa Shabani. 2021. A new methodology for customer behavior analysis using time
       series clustering: A case study on a bank's customers. Kybernetes 50, 2 (2021), 221­242.

                                                                     31
 [2] Hossein Abbasimehr and Farzam Sheikh Baghery. 2022. A novel time series clustering method with fine-tuned
      support vector regression for customer behavior analysis. Expert Systems with Applications 204, January (2022),
      117584.

 [3] Sudipta Acharya and Sriparna Saha. 2016. Importance of proximity measures in clustering of cancer and miRNA
      datasets: Proposal of an automated framework. Molecular BioSystems 12, 11 (2016), 3478­3501.

 [4] Charu C. Aggarwal and Chandan K. Reddy. 2014. Data Clustering: Algorithms and Applications (1st ed.).
      Chapman and Hall/CRC, New York. 652 pages.

 [5] Charu C Aggarwal and ChengXiang Zhai. 2012. A Survey of Text Clustering Algorithms. In Mining Text Data.
      Springer US, Boston, MA, 77­128.

 [6] Swati Aggarwal, Nitika Agarwal, and Monal Jain. 2019. Performance analysis of uncertain k-means clustering
      algorithm using different distance metrics. In Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing. Vol. 798. Springer,
      Singapore, 237­245.

 [7] Saeed Aghabozorgi, Ali Seyed, and Teh Ying Wah. 2015. Time-series clustering ­ A decade review. Information
      Systems 53 (2015), 16­38.

 [8] Hisham Al-Mubaid and Anurag Nagar. 2008. Comparison of four similarity measures based on GO annotations
      for gene clustering. In Proceedings - IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications. IEEE, Marrakech,
      Morocco, 531­536.

 [9] Mihael Ankerst, Markus M Breunig, Hans-Peter Kriegel, and J¨org Sander. 1999. OPTICS: ordering points to
      identify the clustering structure. Proceedings of the 1999 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management
      of Data 28, 2 (6 1999), 49­60.

[10] Michel J. Anzanello and Flavio S. Fogliatto. 2011. Selecting the best clustering variables for grouping mass-
      customized products involving workers learning. International Journal of Production Economics 130, 2 (2011),
      268­276.

[11] Olatz Arbelaitz, Ibai Gurrutxaga, Javier Muguerza, Jesu´s M. P´erez, and In~igo Perona. 2013. An extensive
      comparative study of cluster validity indices. Pattern Recognition 46, 1 (2013), 243­256 Contents.

[12] Nejat Arinik, Vincent Labatut, and Rosa Figueiredo. 2021. Characterizing and Comparing External Measures for
      the Assessment of Cluster Analysis and Community Detection. IEEE Access 9 (2021), 20255­20276.

[13] Deepak Arunachalam and Niraj Kumar. 2018. Benefit-based consumer segmentation and performance evaluation
      of clustering approaches: An evidence of data-driven decision-making. Expert Systems with Applications 111
      (2018), 11­34.

[14] Desgraupes B. 2018. clusterCrit. https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/clusterCrit/index.html

[15] C. Baker. 2019. Validclust. https://pypi.org/project/validclust/

[16] Frank B. Baker and Lawrence J. Hubert. 1975. Measuring the power of hierarchical cluster analysis. J. Amer.
      Statist. Assoc. 70, 349 (1975), 31­38.

[17] E T Bell. 1934. Exponential Polynomials. Annals of Mathematics 35, 2 (1934), 258­277.

[18] Donald Berndt and James Clifford. 1994. Using dynamic time warping to find patterns in time series. Workshop
      on Knowledge Knowledge Discovery in Databases 398 (1994), 359­370.

[19] Simon Bertrand and Pierre Gan C¸ arski. 2023. Integration of clustering evaluation tools in the FoDoMuST
      platform. Technical Report. University of Strasbourg. 22 pages. https://simon-bertrand.github.io/
      Clusters-Features/

[20] James C Bezdek and West Florida. 1995. Cluster validation with generalized Dunn's indices. In Proceedings 1995
      Second New Zealand International Two-Stream Conference on Artificial Neural Networks and Expert Systems.
      IEEE, Dunedin, New Zealand, 190­193.

[21] J. C. Bezdek and R. J. Hathaway. 2002. VAT: A tool for visual assessment of (cluster) tendency. Proceedings of
      the International Joint Conference on Neural Networks 3 (2002), 2225­2230.

[22] James C. Bezdek, Masud Moshtaghi, Thomas Runkler, and Christopher Leckie. 2016. The generalized c index for
      internal fuzzy cluster validity. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems 24, 6 (2016), 1500­1512.

[23] Emmanuel Biabiany, Didier C. Bernard, Vincent Page, and H´el`ene Paugam-Moisy. 2020. Design of an expert
      distance metric for climate clustering: The case of rainfall in the Lesser Antilles. Computers and Geosciences 145
      (2020), 104612.

                                                                           32
[24] Jiang Bian, Dayong Tian, Yuanyan Tang, and Dacheng Tao. 2016. A survey on trajectory clustering analysis.
      Technical Report. University of Technology Sydney. http://arxiv.org/abs/1802.06971

[25] Ingwer Borg and Patrick Groenen. 2005. Modern Multidimensional Scaling: Theory and Applications (2nd ed.).
      Springer, New York, NY. 614 pages.

[26] Guy Brock, Vasyl Pihur, Susmita Datta, and Somnath Datta. 2008. ClValid: An R package for cluster validation.
      Journal of Statistical Software 25, 4 (2008), 22.

[27] T. Calin~ski and J. Harabasz. 1974. A Dendrite Method For Cluster Analysis. Communications in Statistics 3, 1
      (1974), 27.

[28] Ricardo J.G.B. Campello, Davoud Moulavi, Arthur Zimek, and Jo¨rg Sander. 2015. Hierarchical density estimates
      for data clustering, visualization, and outlier detection. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data
      10, 1 (2015), 51.

[29] Juan Carlos Rojas-Thomas and Matilde Santos. 2021. New internal clustering validation measure for contiguous
      arbitrary-shape clusters. International Journal of Intelligent Systems 36, 10 (2021), 5506­5529.

[30] Zeynel Cebeci. 2020. fcvalid: An R Package for Internal Validation of Probabilistic and Possibilistic Clustering.
      Sakarya University Journal of Computer and Information Sciences 3, 1 (2020), 11­27.

[31] Mohamed Chaouch. 2014. Clustering-based improvement of nonparametric functional time series forecasting:
      Application to intra-day household-level load curves. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 5, 1 (2014), 411­419.

[32] Malika Charrad, Nadia Ghazzali, V´eRonique Boiteau, and Azam Niknafs. 2014. Nbclust: An R package for
      determining the relevant number of clusters in a data set. Journal of Statistical Software 61, 6 (2014), 36.

[33] Dongdong Cheng, Qingsheng Zhu, Jinlong Huang, Quanwang Wu, and Lijun Yang. 2019. A Novel Cluster Validity
      Index Based on Local Cores. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 30, 4 (2019), 985­999.

[34] Gianfranco Chicco. 2012. Overview and performance assessment of the clustering methods for electrical load
      pattern grouping. Energy 42, 1 (6 2012), 68­80.

[35] E. C. Dalrymple-Alford. 1970. Measurement of clustering in free recall. Psychological Bulletin 74, 1 (1970), 32­34.

[36] The-Hien Dang-Ha, Roland Olsson, and Hao Wang. 2017. Clustering Methods for Electricity Consumers: An
      Empirical Study in Hvaler-Norway. Technical Report. University of Oslo. 12 pages. https://arxiv.org/abs/
      1703.02502v1

[37] Hoang Anh Dau, Eamonn Keogh, Kaveh Kamgar, Chin-Chia Michael Yeh, Yan Zhu, Shaghayegh Gharghabi,
      Chotirat Ann Ratanamahatana, Yanping Chen, Bing Hu, Nurjahan Begum, Anthony Bagnall, Abdullah Mueen,
      Gustavo Batista, and Hexagon-ML. 2019. The UCR Time Series Classification Archive. https://www.cs.ucr.
      edu/eamonn/time series data 2018/

[38] David L. Davies and Donald W. Bouldin. 1979. A Cluster Separation Measure. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
      Analysis and Machine Intelligence PAMI-1, 2 (1979), 224­227.

[39] Francisco De A.T. De Carvalho, Yves Lechevallier, and Filipe M. De Melo. 2012. Partitioning hard clustering
      algorithms based on multiple dissimilarity matrices. Pattern Recognition 45, 1 (2012), 447­464.

[40] Ian Dent. 2015. Deriving knowledge of household behaviour from domestic electricity usage metering. Ph. D. Disser-
      tation. The University of Nottingham. http://ima.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/thesis master.pdf

[41] Evgenia Dimitriadou. 2020. cclust. https://cran.r-project.org/package=cclust

[42] Roberto Douglas Guimara~es de Aquino, Vitor Venceslau Curtis, and Filipe Alves Neto Verri. 2023. A Clustering
      Validation Index Based on Semantic Description. In Brazilian Conference on Intelligent Systems, Vol. 2. Springer,
      Cham, 315­328.

[43] Shawn Dove, Monika Bo¨hm, Robin Freeman, and Sean Jellesmark. 2023. A User-Friendly Guide to Using Distance
      Measures to Compare Time Series in Ecology. bioRxiv 13, 10 (2023), e10520.

[44] Xinjie Duan, Yan Ma, Yuqing Zhou, Hui Huang, and Bin Wang. 2023. A novel cluster validity index based on
      augmented non-shared nearest neighbors. Expert Systems with Applications 223, August 2022 (2023), 119784.

[45] Richard O Duda and Peter E Hart. 1974. Pattern classification and scene analysis. Wiley, New York. 482 pages.

[46] J. C. Dunn. 1974. Well-separated clusters and optimal fuzzy partitions. Journal of Cybernetics 4, 1 (1974),
      95­104.

                                                                           33
[47] Elham Eskandarnia, Hesham M. Al-Ammal, and Riadh Ksantini. 2022. An embedded deep-clustering-based load
      profiling framework. Sustainable Cities and Society 78 (2022), 103618.

[48] Ines F¨arber, Stephan Gu¨nnemann, Hans-Peter Kriegel, Emmanuel Mu¨ller, Erich Schubert, Thomas Seidl, and
      Arthur Zimek. 2010. On Using Class-Labels in Evaluation of Clusterings. In 1st International Workshop on Dis-
      covering, Summarizing and Using Multiple Clusterings (MultiClust 2010) in conjunction with 16th ACM SIGKDD
      Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2010). ACM, Washington, DC, 9.

[49] Daniel Gomes Ferrari and Leandro Nunes De Castro. 2015. Clustering algorithm selection by meta-learning
      systems: A new distance-based problem characterization and ranking combination methods. Information Sciences
      301 (2015), 181­194.

[50] Caio Flexa, Reginaldo Santos, Walisson Gomes, Claudomiro Sales, and Joa~o C.W.A. Costa. 2019. Mutual
      equidistant-scattering criterion: A new index for crisp clustering. Expert Systems with Applications 128 (2019),
      225­245.

[51] Dimitris Fotakis, Panagiotis Patsilinakos, Eleni Psaroudaki, and Michalis Xefteris. 2024. Efficient Time-Series
      Clustering through Sparse Gaussian Modeling. Algorithms 17, 2 (2024), 29.

[52] Edian F. Franco, Pratip Rana, Aline Cruz, V´ictor V. Caldero´n, Vasco Azevedo, Rommel T.J. Ramos, and Preetam
      Ghosh. 2021. Performance comparison of deep learning autoencoders for cancer subtype detection using multi-
      omics data. Cancers 13, 9 (2021), 17.

[53] Marek Gagolewski. 2021. genieclust: Fast and robust hierarchical clustering. SoftwareX 15 (2021), 100722.

[54] Marek Gagolewski. 2022. A framework for benchmarking clustering algorithms. SoftwareX 20 (2022), 101270.

[55] Marek Gagolewski, Maciej Bartoszuk, and Anna Cena. 2016. Genie: A new, fast, and outlier-resistant hierarchi-
      cal clustering algorithm. Information Sciences 363 (2016), 8­23.

[56] Marek Gagolewski, Maciej Bartoszuk, and Anna Cena. 2021. Are cluster validity measures (in) valid? Information
      Sciences 581 (2021), 620­636.

[57] Guojun Gan, Chaoqun Ma, and Jianhong Wu. 2007. Data clustering : theory, algorithms, and applications (2nd
      ed.). Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia. 430 pages.

[58] Junhao Gan and Yufei Tao. 2015. DBSCAN Revisited: Mis-Claim, Un-Fixability, and Approximation. In Proceed-
      ings of the 2015 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD '15). Association
      for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 519­530.

[59] Attila Gere. 2023. Recommendations for validating hierarchical clustering in consumer sensory projects. Current
      Research in Food Science 6, May (2023), 100522.

[60] Xiaowei Gu, Plamen P. Angelov, Dmitry Kangin, and Jose C. Principe. 2017. A new type of distance metric and
      its use for clustering. Evolving Systems 8, 3 (2017), 167­177.

[61] Shuyue Guan and Murray Loew. 2020. An Internal Cluster Validity Index Using a Distance-based Separability
      Measure. Proceedings - International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence, ICTAI 2020-Novem (2020),
      827­834.

[62] Ibai Gurrutxaga, Javier Muguerza, Olatz Arbelaitz, Jesu´s M. P´erez, and Jos´e I. Mart´in. 2011. Towards a standard
      methodology to evaluate internal cluster validity indices. Pattern Recognition Letters 32, 3 (2011), 505­515.

[63] Joonas Ha¨m¨ala¨inen, Susanne Jauhiainen, and Tommi Ka¨rkk¨ainen. 2017. Comparison of internal clustering vali-
      dation indices for prototype-based clustering. Algorithms 10, 3 (2017), 14.

[64] Christian Hennig. 2015. Clustering strategy and method selection. In Handbook of Cluster Analysis (1st ed.).
      Chapman and Hall/CRC, New York, 703­730.

[65] Christian Hennig. 2015. What are the true clusters? Pattern Recognition Letters 64 (2015), 53­62.

[66] Christian Hennig. 2018. Some Thoughts on Simulation Studies to Compare Clustering Methods. Archives of Data
      Science, Series A 5, 1 (2018), 21.

[67] Christian Hennig. 2019. Cluster Validation by Measurement of Clustering Characteristics Relevant to the User.
      In Data Analysis and Applications 1. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, London, UK, Chapter 1, 1­24.

[68] Heike Hofmann, Karen Kafadar, and Hadley Wickham. 2011. Letter-value plots: Boxplots for large data. Technical
      Report. Iowa State University, Indiana University and Rice University. https://vita.had.co.nz/papers/
      letter-value-plot.pdf

                                                                           34
[69] Eduardo Raul Hruschka, Ricardo J.G.B. Campello, Alex A. Freitas, and Andr´e C.Ponce Leon F. de Carvalho.
      2009. A survey of evolutionary algorithms for clustering. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics
      Part C: Applications and Reviews 39, 2 (2009), 133­155.

[70] Lianyu Hu and Caiming Zhong. 2019. An internal validity index based on density-involved distance. IEEE Access
      7, Lccv (2019), 40038­40051.

[71] Lawrence Hubert and Phipps Arabie. 1985. Comparing partitions. Journal of Classification 2, 1 (1985), 193­218.

[72] Lawrence J. Hubert and Joel R. Levin. 1976. A general statistical framework for assessing categorical clustering
      in free recall. Psychological Bulletin 83, 6 (1976), 1072­1080.

[73] F´elix Iglesias and Wolfgang Kastner. 2013. Analysis of Similarity Measures in Times Series Clustering for the
      Discovery of Building Energy Patterns. Energies 6, 2 (2013), 579­597.

[74] Anil K Jain and Richard C Dubes. 1988. Algorithms for clustering data (1st ed.). Prentice-Hall, Inc., New Jersey.
      334 pages.

[75] A K Jain, M N Murty, and P J Flynn. 1999. Data clustering: a review. ACM Comput. Surv. 31, 3 (9 1999),
      264­323.

[76] Mayank Jain, Mukta Jain, Tarek AlSkaif, and Soumyabrata Dev. 2022. Which internal validation indices to use
      while clustering electric load demand profiles? Sustainable Energy, Grids and Networks 32 (2022), 100849.

[77] Pablo A. Jaskowiak, Ivan G. Costa, and Ricardo J.G.B. Campello. 2022. The area under the ROC curve as a
      measure of clustering quality. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 36, 3 (2022), 1219­1245.

[78] Pablo A. Jaskowiak, Davoud Moulavi, Antonio C.S. Furtado, Ricardo J.G.B. Campello, Arthur Zimek, and J¨org
      Sander. 2016. On strategies for building effective ensembles of relative clustering validity criteria. Knowledge and
      Information Systems 47, 2 (5 2016), 329­354.

[79] Ali Javed, Byung Suk Lee, and Donna M. Rizzo. 2020. A benchmark study on time series clustering. Machine
      Learning with Applications 1, September (2020), 100001.

[80] Adam Jilling and Marco Alvarez. 2020. Optimizing Recommendations for Clustering Algorithms Using Meta-
      Learning. In Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Neural Networks. IEEE, Glasgow, UK, 10.

[81] Jiashun Jin and Wanjie Wang. 2016. Influential features PCA for high dimensional clustering. Annals of Statistics
      44, 6 (2016), 2323­2359.

[82] Ada´n Jos´e-Garc´ia and Wilfrido G´omez-Flores. 2023. CVIK: A MATLAB-based cluster validity index toolbox for
      automatic data clustering. SoftwareX 22 (2023), 101359.

[83] Ad´an Jos´e-Garc´ia, Julia Handl, Wilfrido Go´mez-Flores, and Mario Garza-Fabre. 2021. An evolutionary many-
      objective approach to multiview clustering using feature and relational data. Applied Soft Computing 108 (2021),
      107425.

[84] Konstantinos Kalpakis, Dhiral Gada, and Vasundhara Puttagunta. 2001. Distance measures for effective clustering
      of ARIMA time-series. In Proceedings 2001 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining. IEEE, San Jose, CA,
      USA, 273­280.

[85] Leonard Kaufman and Peter J. Rousseeuw. 1990. Finding Groups in Data: An Introduction to Cluster Analysis.
      Vol. 66. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New Jersey. 342 pages.

[86] Eamonn Keogh and Shruti Kasetty. 2003. On the need for time series data mining benchmarks: A survey and
      empirical demonstration. Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
      and Data Mining 7 (2003), 349­371.

[87] Jaehwi Jaehee Kim and Jaehwi Jaehee Kim. 2020. Comparison of time series clustering methods and application
      to power consumption pattern clustering. Communications for Statistical Applications and Methods 27, 6 (2020),
      589­602.

[88] Sarah M. Kim, Matthew I. Pen~a, Mark Moll, George Giannakopoulos, George N. Bennett, and Lydia E. Kavraki.
      2016. An evaluation of different clustering methods and distance measures used for grouping metabolic pathways.
      In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, BICOB 2016.
      ISCA, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 115­122.

[89] Jordan Kramer, Lyric Boone, Thomas Clifford, Justin Bruce, and John Matta. 2020. Analysis of Medical Data
      Using Community Detection on Inferred Networks. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 24, 11
      (2020), 3136­3143.

                                                                           35
 [90] Dheeraj Kumar and James C. Bezdek. 2020. Clustering tendency assessment for datasets having inter-cluster
       density variations. In SPCOM 2020 - International Conference on Signal Processing and Communications. IEEE,
       Bangalore, India, 5.

 [91] Riz Lala, Gauravi Patankar, Aditya Patil, and Himani Deshpaande. 2023. Enhancing Music Data Clustering: An
       Empirical Analysis for Music Clustering and Scaling Optimization. In 2023 6th IEEE International Conference
       on Advances in Science and Technology, ICAST 2023. IEEE, Mumbai, India, 313­318.

 [92] Soo Hyun Lee, Young Seon Jeong, Jae Yun Kim, and Myong K. Jeong. 2018. A new clustering validity index for
       arbitrary shape of clusters. Pattern Recognition Letters 112 (2018), 263­269.

 [93] Chen Lei and Raymond Ng. 2004. On The Marriage of Lp-norms and Edit Distance. In Proceedings 2004 VLDB
       Conference. ACM, Toronto, Canada, 792­803.

 [94] Ao Li, Cheng Fan, Fu Xiao, and Zhijie Chen. 2022. Distance measures in building informatics: An in-depth
       assessment through typical tasks in building energy management. Energy and Buildings 258 (2022), 111817.

 [95] Q I Li, Shihong Yue, and Mingliang Ding. 2020. Volume and Surface Area-Based Cluster Validity Index. IEEE
       Access 8 (2020), 24170 ­ 24181.

 [96] Jessica Lin, Eamonn Keogh, Li Wei, and Stefano Lonardi. 2007. Experiencing SAX: a novel symbolic representation
       of time series. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 2007 15:2 15, 2 (4 2007), 107­144.

 [97] Tianmou Liu, Han Yu, and Rachael Hageman Blair. 2022. Stability estimation for unsupervised clustering: A
       review. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Statistics 14, 6 (2022), 17.

 [98] Yanchi Liu, Zhongmou Li, Hui Xiong, Xuedong Gao, and Junjie Wu. 2010. Understanding of internal clustering
       validation measures. In Proceedings - IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, ICDM. IEEE, Sydney,
       NSW, Australia, 911­916.

 [99] Maciej Luczak. 2016. Hierarchical clustering of time series data with parametric derivative dynamic time warping.
       Expert Systems with Applications 62 (2016), 116­130.

[100] Mathworks. 2013. Evalclusters. https://au.mathworks.com/help/stats/evalclusters.html

[101] Geoffrey J. Mclachlan and Suren Rathnayake. 2014. On the number of components in a Gaussian mixture model.
       Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 4, 5 (2014), 341­355.

[102] Marina Meila. 2007. Comparing clusterings--an information based distance. Journal of Multivariate Analysis 98,
       5 (2007), 873­895.

[103] Charles Arthur Mercier. 1912. A new logic. Open Court Pub. Co, Chicago. 422 pages.

[104] Glenn W Milligan. 1996. Clustering Validation: Results and Implications for Applied Analyses. In Clustering and
       Classification. World Scientific Publishing Co, Singapore, 341­375.

[105] Glenn W. Milligan and Martha C. Cooper. 1985. An examination of procedures for determining the number of
       clusters in a data set. Psychometrika 50, 2 (1985), 159­179.

[106] Glenn W Milligan and Martha C Cooper. 1986. A Study of the Comparability of External Criteria for Hierarchical
       Cluster Analysis. Multivariate Behavioral Research 21, 4 (10 1986), 441­458.

[107] A. Moayedi, R. Ali Abbaspour, and A. Chehreghan. 2019. An evaluation of the efficiency of similarity functions
       in density-based clustering of spatial trajectories. Annals of GIS 25, 4 (2019), 313­327.

[108] Soumita Modak. 2023. A new measure for assessment of clustering based on kernel density estimation. Commu-
       nications in Statistics - Theory and Methods 52, 17 (2023), 5942­5951.

[109] Pablo Montero and Jos´e A. Vilar. 2014. TSclust: An R package for time series clustering. Journal of Statistical
       Software 62, 1 (2014), 1­43.

[110] Kevin R. Moon, David van Dijk, Zheng Wang, Scott Gigante, Daniel B. Burkhardt, William S. Chen, Kristina
       Yim, Antonia van den Elzen, Matthew J. Hirn, Ronald R. Coifman, Natalia B. Ivanova, Guy Wolf, and Smita Kr-
       ishnaswamy. 2019. Visualizing structure and transitions in high-dimensional biological data. Nature Biotechnology
       37, 12 (2019), 1482­1492.

[111] F. Mo¨rchen. 2003. Time series feature extraction for data mining using DWT and DFT. Technical Report.
       Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Philipps-University Marburg, Germany. 31 pages.

[112] Davoud Moulavi, Pablo A. Jaskowiak, Ricardo J.G.B. Campello, Arthur Zimek, and Jorg Sander. 2014. Density-
       based clustering validation. In Proceedings of the 14th SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM),
       Vol. 2. SIAM, Philadelphia, PA, 839­847.

                                                                             36
[113] Andreas C Mu¨ller, Sebastian Nowozin, Christoph H Lampert, Hui Xiong, and Zhongmou Li. 2012. Understanding
       and Enhancement of Internal Clustering Validation Measures. Data Clustering 43, 3 (2012), 205­215.

[114] Vit Niennattrakul and Chotirat Ann Ratanamahatana. 2007. Inaccuracies of Shape Averaging Method Using
       Dynamic Time Warping for Time Series Data. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture
       Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 4487 LNCS (2007), 513­520.

[115] Lukasz Nieweglowski. 2023. clv. https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/clv/index.html

[116] Gbeminiyi John Oyewole and George Alex Thopil. 2023. Data clustering: application and trends. Artificial
       Intelligence Review 56, 7 (2023), 6439­6475.

[117] Malay K. Pakhira, Sanghamitra Bandyopadhyay, and Ujjwal Maulik. 2004. Validity index for crisp and fuzzy
       clusters. Pattern Recognition 37, 3 (3 2004), 487­501.

[118] John Paparrizos and Luis Gravano. 2015. K-shape: Efficient and accurate clustering of time series. In Proceedings of
       the ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data, Vol. 2015-May. ACM, Melbourne, Australia,
       1855­1870.

[119] John Paparrizos, Chunwei Liu, Aaron J. Elmore, and Michael J. Franklin. 2020. Debunking Four Long-Standing
       Misconceptions of Time-Series Distance Measures. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International Conference
       on Management of Data. ACM, Portland, OR, USA, 1887­1905.

[120] Francois Petitjean, Alain Ketterlin, and Pierre Gancarski. 2011. A global averaging method for dynamic time
       warping , with applications to clustering. Pattern Recognition 44, 3 (2011), 678­693.

[121] Bruno Almeida Pimentel and Andr´e C.P.L.F. de Carvalho. 2019. A new data characterization for selecting
       clustering algorithms using meta-learning. Information Sciences 477 (2019), 203­219.

[122] Andrea Pinceti, Lalitha Sankar, and Oliver Kosut. 2021. Synthetic Time-Series Load Data via Conditional Genera-
       tive Adversarial Networks. In 2021 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM). IEEE, Washington,
       DC, 1­5.

[123] Reihaneh Rabbany, Mansoreh Takaffoli, Justin Fagnan, Osmar R. Za¨iane, and Ricardo J.G.B. Campello. 2012.
       Relative validity criteria for community mining algorithms. In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE/ACM International
       Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining, ASONAM 2012. IEEE/ACM, Istanbul, Turkey,
       258­265.

[124] Amin Rajabi, Mohsen Eskandari, Mojtaba Jabbari Ghadi, Li Li, Jiangfeng Zhang, and Pierluigi Siano. 2020. A
       comparative study of clustering techniques for electrical load pattern segmentation. Renewable and Sustainable
       Energy Reviews 120 (2020), 109628.

[125] Thanawin Rakthanmanon, Bilson Campana, Abdullah Mueen, Gustavo Batista, Brandon Westover, Qiang Zhu,
       Jesin Zakaria, and Eamonn Keogh. 2012. Searching and mining trillions of time series subsequences under dynamic
       time warping. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
       Mining. ACM, Beijing, China, 262­270.

[126] Shini Renjith, A. Sreekumar, and M. Jathavedan. 2021. A Comparative Analysis of Clustering Quality Based on
       Internal Validation Indices for Dimensionally Reduced Social Media Data. In Advances in Intelligent Systems and
       Computing, Vol. 1133. Springer, Singapore, 1047­1065.

[127] Rosana Guimar~aes Ribeiro and Ricardo Rios. 2021. Temporal gap statistic: A new internal index to validate time
       series clustering. Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 142 (2021), 110326.

[128] Gian-Carlo Rota. 1964. The Number of Partitions of a Set. The American Mathematical Monthly 71, 5 (1964),
       498­504.

[129] Peter J Rousseeuw. 1987. Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster analysis. J.
       Comput. Appl. Math. 20 (1987), 53­65.

[130] Maurice Roux. 2018. A Comparative Study of Divisive and Agglomerative Hierarchical Clustering Algorithms.
       Journal of Classification 35, 2 (2018), 345­366.

[131] L. G.B. Ruiz, M. C. Pegalajar, R. Arcucci, and M. Molina-Solana. 2020. A time-series clustering methodology for
       knowledge extraction in energy consumption data. Expert Systems with Applications 160 (12 2020), 113731.

[132] R. Scitovski, K. Sabo, D. Grahovac, and Ungar. 2023. Minimal distance index -- A new clustering performance
       metrics. Information Sciences 640, May (2023), 119046.

[133] Ali Senol. 2022. VIASCKDE Index: A Novel Internal Cluster Validity Index for Arbitrary-Shaped Clusters Based
       on the Kernel Density Estimation. Computational Intelligence and Neuroscience 2022 (2022), 20.

                                                                             37
[134] Gulezar Shamim and Mohd Rihan. 2020. Multi-Domain Feature Extraction for Improved Clustering of Smart
       Meter Data. Technology and Economics of Smart Grids and Sustainable Energy 5, 1 (2020), 8.

[135] Gholamhosein Sheikholeslami, Surojit Chatterjee, and Aidong Zhang. 1998. WaveCluster: A Multi-Resolution
       Clustering Approach for Very Large Spatial Databases. In Proceedings of the 24rd International Conference on
       Very Large Data Bases (VLDB '98). Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 428­439.

[136] Jai Puneet Singh and Nizar Bouguila. 2017. Proportional data clustering using K-means algorithm: A compari-
       son of different distances. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology. IEEE,
       Toronto, ON, Canada, 1048­1052.

[137] Kaleb E Smith and Anthony O Smith. 2020. Conditional GAN for timeseries generation. Technical Report.
       Florida Institute of Technology. 15 pages. http://arxiv.org/abs/2006.16477

[138] Kate A. Smith-Miles. 2008. Cross-disciplinary perspectives on meta-learning for algorithm selection. Comput.
       Surveys 41, 1 (2008), 25.

[139] A.J. Stam. 1983. Generation of a Random Partition Finite Set by an Urn Model. Journal of Combinatorial
       Theory, Series A 35, 2 (1983), 231­240.

[140] Douglas Steinley. 2004. Properties of the Hubert-Arabie adjusted Rand index. Psychological Methods 9, 3 (9
       2004), 386­396.

[141] Matthias Studer. 2013. WeightedCluster Library Manual: A practical guide to creating typologies of trajectories
       in the social sciences with R. Technical Report. LIVES Working Papers 24.

[142] Alvin Subakti, Hendri Murfi, and Nora Hariadi. 2022. The performance of BERT as data representation of text
       clustering. Journal of Big Data 9, 1 (2022), 21.

[143] Etienne Gael Tajeuna and Shengrui Wang. 2018. A Network-Based Approach to Enhance Electricity Load Fore-
       casting. In IEEE International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW). IEEE, Singapore, 266­275.

[144] Kadim Tasdemir, Berna Yalcin, and Isa Yildirim. 2015. Approximate spectral clustering with utilized similarity
       information using geodesic based hybrid distance measures. Pattern Recognition 48, 4 (2015), 1465­1477.

[145] Erdogan Taskesen. 2020. clusteval. https://pypi.org/project/clusteval/

[146] Thanchanok Teeraratkul, Daniel O Neill, and Sanjay Lall. 2018. Shape-Based Approach to Household Electric
       Load Curve Clustering and Prediction. IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid 9, 5 (2018), 5196­5206.

[147] Juan Carlos Rojas Thomas and Matilde Santos Pen~as. 2019. New internal clustering evaluation index based on
       line segments. Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and
       Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 11871 LNCS (2019), 534­541.

[148] Wiebke Toussaint and Deshendran Moodley. 2019. Comparison of clustering techniques for residential load profiles
       in South Africa. CEUR Workshop Proceedings 2540 (2019), 16.

[149] Wiebke Toussaint and Deshendran Moodley. 2020. Identifying optimal clustering structures for residential energy
       consumption patterns using competency questions. ACM International Conference Proceeding Series 2020-Dec,
       December (2020), 66­73.

[150] V. A. Traag, L. Waltman, and N. J. van Eck. 2019. From Louvain to Leiden: guaranteeing well-connected
       communities. Scientific Reports 9, 1 (2019), 12.

[151] Holger Trittenbach, Jakob Bach, and Klemens Bo¨hm. 2019. Understanding the effects of temporal energy-data
       aggregation on clustering quality. IT - Information Technology 61, 2-3 (2019), 111­123.

[152] Amin Ullah, Kilichbek Haydarov, Ijaz Ul Haq, Khan Muhammad, Seungmin Rho, Miyoung Lee, and Sung Wook
       Baik. 2020. Deep learning assisted buildings energy consumption profiling using smart meter data. Sensors
       (Switzerland) 20, 3 (2020), 15.

[153] Toon Van Craenendonck and Hendrik Blockeel. 2015. Using internal validity measures to compare clustering
       algorithms. In International Conference on Machine Learning. 8.

[154] Lucas Vendramin, Ricardo J.G.B. Campello, and Eduardo R. Hruschka. 2010. Relative clustering validity criteria:
       A comparative overview. Statistical Analysis and Data Mining: The ASA Data Science Journal 3, 4 (8 2010),
       209­235.

[155] Lucas Vendramin, Pablo A Jaskowiak, and Ricardo J G B Campello. 2013. On the Combination of Relative
       Clustering Validity Criteria. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Scientific and Statistical
       Database Management. ACM, Baltimore, MD, USA, 12.

                                                                             38
[156] Nguyen Xuan Vinh, Julien Epps, and James Bailey. 2010. Information theoretic measures for clusterings com-
       parison: Variants, properties, normalization and correction for chance. Journal of Machine Learning Research 11
       (2010), 2837­2854.

[157] Ulrike Von Luxburg and Robert C Williamson. 2012. Clustering: Science or Art?. In JMLR Workshop Conf Proc,
       Vol. 27. 65­79.

[158] Marek Walesiak. 2008. Cluster analysis with clusterSim computer program and R environment. Acta Universitatis
       Lodziensis 216, October (2008), 303­311.

[159] Marek Walesiak and Andrzej Dudek. 2020. The Choice of Variable Normalization Method in Cluster Analysis.
       In Education Excellence and Innovation Management: A 2025 Vision to Sustain Economic Development During
       Global Challenges. 325­340.

[160] Kaijun Wang, Baijie Wang, and Liuqing Peng. 2009. CVAP: Validation for cluster analyses. Data Science Journal
       8, May (2009), 88­93.

[161] Liang Wang, Uyen T.V. Nguyen, James C. Bezdek, Christopher A. Leckie, and Kotagiri Ramamohanarao. 2010.
       IVAT and aVAT: Enhanced visual analysis for cluster tendency assessment. Lecture Notes in Computer Science
       (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 6118, PART 1
       (2010), 16­27.

[162] Wei Wang, Feng Xia, Hansong Nie, Zhikui Chen, Zhiguo Gong, Xiangjie Kong, and Wei Wei. 2021. Vehicle
       Trajectory Clustering Based on Dynamic Representation Learning of Internet of Vehicles. IEEE Transactions on
       Intelligent Transportation Systems 22, 6 (2021), 3567 ­ 3576.

[163] Wei Wang, Jiong Yang, and Richard R Muntz. 1997. STING: A Statistical Information Grid Approach to Spatial
       Data Mining. In Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB '97). Morgan
       Kaufmann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 186­195.

[164] Xiaoyue Wang, Abdullah Mueen, Hui Ding, Goce Trajcevski, Peter Scheuermann, and Eamonn Keogh. 2013.
       Experimental comparison of representation methods and distance measures for time series data. Data Mining and
       Knowledge Discovery 26, 2 (2013), 275­309.

[165] Matthijs J. Warrens and Hanneke van der Hoef. 2022. Understanding the Adjusted Rand Index and Other Partition
       Comparison Indices Based on Counting Object Pairs. Journal of Classification 39, 3 (2022), 487­509.

[166] John Williams. 2013. Clustering household electricity use profiles. In ACM International Conference Proceeding
       Series. ACM, Dunedin, New Zealand, 19­26.

[167] Clar Lynda R. Williams-DeVane, David M. Reif, Elaine Cohen Hubal, Pierre R. Bushel, Edward E. Hudgens,
       Jane E. Gallagher, and Stephen W. Edwards. 2013. Decision tree-based method for integrating gene expression,
       demographic, and clinical data to determine disease endotypes. BMC Systems Biology 7 (2013), 19.

[168] Nathakhun Wiroonsri. 2024. Clustering performance analysis using a new correlation-based cluster validity index.
       Pattern Recognition 145, April 2023 (2024), 109910.

[169] David H. Wolpert and William G. Macready. 1997. No free lunch theorems for optimization. IEEE Transactions
       on Evolutionary Computation 1, 1 (1997), 67­82.

[170] Wen Yan Wong, Yungi Jeong, Chan Jung, and Seungjun Lee. 2019. autocluster. https://pypi.org/project/
       autocluster/

[171] J. Xie, Zhong Yang Xiong, Qi Zhu Dai, Xiao Xia Wang, and Yu Fang Zhang. 2020. A new internal index based
       on density core for clustering validation. Information Sciences 506 (2020), 346­365.

[172] Xu Yang, Cheng Deng, Feng Zheng, Junchi Yan, and Wei Liu. 2019. Deep spectral clustering using dual au-
       toencoder network. Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
       Recognition 2019-June (2019), 4061­4070.

[173] S Yilmaz, J Chambers, and M K Patel. 2019. Comparison of clustering approaches for domestic electricity load
       profile characterisation - Implications for demand side management. Energy 180 (2019), 665­677.

[174] Jesin Zakaria, Abdullah Mueen, and Eamonn Keogh. 2012. Clustering time series using unsupervised-shapelets.
       In Proceedings - IEEE International Conference on Data Mining, ICDM. IEEE, Brussels, Belgium, 785­794.

[175] Chi Zhang, Sanmukh R. Kuppannagari, Rajgopal Kannan, and Viktor K. Prasanna. 2018. Generative Adversarial
       Network for Synthetic Time Series Data Generation in Smart Grids. In 2018 IEEE International Conference
       on Communications, Control, and Computing Technologies for Smart Grids, SmartGridComm 2018. Institute of
       Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., Aalborg, Denmark, 6.

                                                                             39
[176] Mimi Zhang and Andrew Parnell. 2023. Review of Clustering Methods for Functional Data. ACM Transactions
       on Knowledge Discovery from Data 17, 7 (2023), 34.

[177] Yunsheng Zhang, Qingzhang Shi, Jiawei Zhu, Jian Peng, and Haifeng Li. 2021. Time series clustering with
       topological and geometric mixed distance. Mathematics 9, 9 (2021), 17.

                                                                             40
Supplementary Materials

Coincidence of EVI and RVI Optima

                  100                                                                                             100           ED        BD           ChD      Mean
                                                                                                                   80                                           Match
Success Rate (%)  80                                                                              Success Rate (%) 60           MD        CaD          CoD       CHI PBM
                                                                                                                   40
                  60                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                    0 AUCC
                  40

                  20

                  0                       AUCC  CI  SWC              RDVBII  DI  CHI         PBM                            CI       SWC       RDVBII       DI

                                                    (a) Vendramin (over k)                                                      (b) Vendramin (over SPs)

                  100                                                                                             100           ED        BD           ChD      Mean
                   80                                                                             Success Rate (%) 80           MD        CaD          CoD      Match
Success Rate (%)   60                                                                                              60
                   40                                                                                              40
                   20                           CI  SWC              RDVBII  DI  CHI         PBM                   20       CI       SWC       RDVBII       DI  CHI PBM
                    0                                                                                               0 AUCC

                         AUCC

                                                    (c) Gagolewski (over k)                                                     (d) Gagolewski (over SPs)

                  100                                                                                             100           MSM       TWED         MD       Mean
                   80                                                                             Success Rate (%) 80           SBD       ED           CD       Match
Success Rate (%)   60                                                                                              60           DTW                             CHI PBM
                   40                                                                                              40
                   20                           CI  SWC              RDVBII  DI  CHI         PBM                   20       CI       SWC       RDVBII       DI
                    0                                                                                               0 AUCC

                         AUCC

                                                  (e) UCR (over k)                                                                   (f) UCR (over SPs)
                  100
                                                                                                                  100           MSM       TWED         MD       Mean
                                                                                                  Success Rate (%) 80           SBD       ED           CD       Match
Success Rate (%)  80                                                                                               60           DTW                             CHI PBM
                                                                                                                   40
                  60                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                    0 AUCC
                  40

                  20

                  0                       AUCC  CI  SWC              RDVBII  DI  CHI         PBM                            CI       SWC       RDVBII       DI

                                          (g) UCR (over k with max dataset ARI threshold of 0.6)                    (h) UCR (over SPs with max dataset ARI threshold of 0.6)

Figure 16: The success rates for coincidence of optimal values for AMI and the different versions of each RVI. The first three
rows show the results for each battery, and the left and right columns show the success rates for the k- and SP-selection tasks
respectively. The final row has been produced for a subset of 41 datasets from the UCR archive where at least one of the dataset
partitions had an ARI in excess of 0.6. Note that the legend on the right plot serves both plots in each row.

                                                     Vendramin                   Gagolewski                         UCR                         UCR (ARI Threshold Subset)

                  Proportion Per Dataset  1.0                                                                                                 MSM SBD DTW TWED ED MD CD
                                          0.8
                                          0.6                                ED MD BD CaD ChD CoD MSM SBD DTW TWED ED MD CD
                                          0.4
                                          0.2                                                      Clustering Distance
                                          0.0

                                               ED MD BD CaD ChD CoD

Figure 17: The proportion of times each SP generated the optimal partition according to the AMI for various combinations of
clustering algorithm and k for each of the datasets, i.e. which SP were found to be optimal according to the AMI when producing
Figures 16b, 16d, 16f and 16h.

                                                                                                  41
Minimum EVI Requirements

100                                                                                                                                   GVUUeCCangRRdo(rlTaehmwrseinksihold)
Percentage of Datasets (%)                                                25
                                            Percentage of Partitions (%)
80                                                                        20

60                                                                        15

40                                                                        10

20                                                                        5

0 0.0 0.2 0.4AMI0.6 0.8 1.0                                               0 0.2      0.0          0.2         0.A4MI  0.6     0.8     1.0

     (a) Maximum AMI                                                                                     (b) All AMI

     Figure 18: Histograms of (a) the maximum AMI value per dataset, and (b) AMI values for every partition.

Correlation Analyses

                                                                                          Evaluation Schemes

      RVI             ED                                                  MD     BD CaD ChD CoD Mean                          Match

     AUCC                    Selecting Optimal Partition With Varying k                                                        0.804
       CI                                                                                                                      0.791
                      0.807                                               0.810  0.784    0.775   0.792       0.769   0.803    0.655
      SWC             0.792                                               0.793  0.776    0.786   0.765       0.731   0.785    0.446
      DBI             0.669                                               0.668  0.680    0.706   0.675       0.688   0.689    0.139
       DI             0.447                                               0.428  0.439    0.479   0.471       0.361   0.430    0.798
      CHI             0.153                                               0.165  0.160    0.053   0.137       0.177   0.167    0.804
     PBM              0.801                                               0.804  0.807    0.756   0.800       0.648   0.708
                      0.805                                               0.806  0.809    0.686   0.817       0.614   0.807    0.666
     AUCC                                                                                                                      0.324
       CI                    Selecting Optimal Partition With Varying SP                                                       0.402
                                                                                                                               0.361
      SWC             0.692                                               0.726  0.747    0.683   0.693       0.616   0.844    0.088
      DBI             0.636                                               0.683  0.717    0.646   0.573       0.428   0.809    0.077
       DI             0.625                                               0.637  0.606    0.655   0.535       0.337   0.635   -0.082
      CHI             0.539                                               0.603  0.605    0.544   0.269       0.243   0.419
     PBM              0.217                                               0.291  0.403    0.441   0.088       0.173   0.434
                      0.069                                               0.099  0.060    0.470   0.056       -0.122  -0.122
                      0.076                                               0.131  0.118    0.457   0.044       -0.063  0.110

Table 13: Median Pearson correlations between the AMI and the different versions of each RVI for the k-selection task
(top) and SP-selection task (bottom) on the Vendramin battery.

                                                                                          Evaluation Schemes

      RVI              ED    MD                                                  BD       CaD ChD CoD Mean                    Match

     AUCC             0.604  Selecting Optimal Partition With Varying k                                                        0.547
       CI             0.577                                                                                                    0.497
                      0.572  0.603                                               0.499    0.520        0.550  0.423   0.555    0.570
      SWC             0.353  0.615                                               0.372    0.472        0.565  0.418   0.519    0.227
      DBI             0.289  0.571                                               0.383    0.607        0.549  0.085   0.447    0.277
       DI             0.501  0.346                                               0.092    0.151        0.268  -0.067  0.050    0.211
      CHI             0.471  0.298                                               0.287    -0.043       0.313  -0.233  0.297    0.277
     PBM                     0.455                                               0.252    0.084        0.520  0.197   0.150
                      0.746  0.482                                               0.160    -0.192       0.469  0.121   0.146    0.169
     AUCC             0.755                                                                                                    0.093
       CI             0.728  Selecting Optimal Partition With Varying SP                                                      -0.179
                      0.690                                                                                                   -0.206
      SWC             0.561  0.753                                               0.391    0.244        0.650  -0.330  0.577    0.409
      DBI             0.577  0.758                                               0.267    0.273        0.692  -0.285  0.613   -0.503
       DI             0.496  0.750                                               0.564    0.382        0.686  -0.341  0.511   -0.238
      CHI                    0.683                                               0.546    0.412        0.644  -0.191  -0.134
     PBM                     0.582                                               0.129    0.235        0.560  -0.532  0.515
                             0.570                                               -0.009   0.533        0.551  -0.483  -0.439
                             0.484                                               0.076    0.533        0.477  -0.482  -0.189

Table 14: Median Pearson correlations between the AMI and the different versions of each RVI for the k-selection task
(top) and SP-selection task (bottom) on the Gagolewski battery.

                                                                                          42
                              Evaluation Schemes

RVI MSM       SBD DTW TWED ED                     MD      CD      Mean Match

              Selecting Optimal Partition With Varying k

AUCC  0.560   0.465   0.538   0.560       0.505   0.521   0.505   0.555   0.485
  CI  0.555   0.520   0.675   0.383       0.345   0.450   0.430   0.595   0.532
      -0.250  -0.328  -0.358  -0.234      -0.354  -0.321  -0.385  -0.353  -0.127
 SWC  -0.210  -0.182  -0.257  -0.205      -0.231  -0.239  -0.243  -0.262  -0.166
 DBI  -0.138  -0.254  -0.135  -0.223      -0.269  -0.169  -0.268  -0.274  -0.110
  DI  -0.293  -0.044  -0.076  -0.296      -0.251  -0.341  -0.158  -0.206  -0.298
 CHI  -0.634  -0.447  -0.210  -0.653      -0.688  -0.656  -0.433  -0.554  -0.532
PBM

              Selecting Optimal Partition With Varying SP

AUCC  0.464   0.355   0.169   0.143       -0.230  0.012   -0.230  0.176   0.222
  CI  0.514   0.366   0.258   0.191       -0.162  0.017   -0.188  0.168   0.249
      0.527   0.348   0.293   0.212       -0.241  0.037   -0.250  0.189   0.212
 SWC  0.219   0.154   0.096   -0.024      -0.290  -0.208  -0.215  -0.000  0.017
 DBI  0.215   0.154   0.090   -0.006      -0.246  -0.090  -0.227  -0.021  -0.019
  DI  0.360   0.222   0.202   0.205       -0.119  0.101   -0.175  0.135   0.177
 CHI  0.239   0.174   0.097   0.123       -0.117  -0.024  -0.159  0.061   0.114
PBM

Table 15: Median Pearson correlations between the AMI and the different versions of each RVI for the k-selection task
(top) and SP-selection task (bottom) on the UCR battery.

                                      43
                                   1.0                                                    ED       MD           BD  CaD           ChD      CoD       Mean        Match

Average Spearman Rank Correlation  0.8
                                   0.6
                                   0.4
                                   0.2
                                   0.0
                                   0.2
                                   0.4
                                   0.6
                                   0.8
                                   1.0
                                                                           AUCC                        CI                                       SWC                            DBI
                                                                                                                          RVI
                                        Average Spearman Rank Correlation  1.0
                                                                           0.8
                                                                           0.6
                                                                           0.4
                                                                           0.2
                                                                           0.0
                                                                           0.2
                                                                           0.4
                                                                           0.6
                                                                           0.8
                                                                           1.0
                                                                                 DI                                       RCVHII                                        PBM

                                                                                                                    (a) Vendramin

                                   1.0                                                    ED       MD           BD  CaD           ChD      CoD       Mean        Match

Average Spearman Rank Correlation  0.8
                                   0.6
                                   0.4
                                   0.2
                                   0.0
                                   0.2
                                   0.4
                                   0.6
                                   0.8
                                   1.0
                                                                           AUCC                        CI                                       SWC                            DBI
                                                                                                                          RVI
                                        Average Spearman Rank Correlation  1.0
                                                                           0.8
                                                                           0.6
                                                                           0.4
                                                                           0.2
                                                                           0.0
                                                                           0.2
                                                                           0.4
                                                                           0.6
                                                                           0.8
                                                                           1.0
                                                                                 DI                                       RCVHII                                        PBM

                                                                                                                    (b) Gagolewski

                                   1.0                                               MSM      SBD          DTW      TWED          ED   MD       CD         Mean         Match

Average Spearman Rank Correlation  0.8
                                   0.6
                                   0.4
                                   0.2
                                   0.0
                                   0.2
                                   0.4
                                   0.6
                                   0.8
                                   1.0
                                                                           AUCC                        CI                                       SWC                            DBI
                                                                                                                          RVI
                                        Average Spearman Rank Correlation  1.0
                                                                           0.8
                                                                           0.6
                                                                           0.4
                                                                           0.2
                                                                           0.0
                                                                           0.2
                                                                           0.4
                                                                           0.6
                                                                           0.8
                                                                           1.0
                                                                                 DI                                       RCVHII                                        PBM

                                                                                                                    (c) UCR

Figure 19: Enhanced boxplots of the distributions of median Pearson correlations between the ARI and various versions of RVIs,
grouped by battery. The boxenplots are presented with no fill for the k-selection task, and filled for the SP-selection task.

                                                                                                                          44
                                   1.0                                                    ED       MD           BD  CaD           ChD      CoD       Mean        Match

Average Spearman Rank Correlation  0.8
                                   0.6
                                   0.4
                                   0.2
                                   0.0
                                   0.2
                                   0.4
                                   0.6
                                   0.8
                                   1.0
                                                                           AUCC                        CI                                       SWC                            DBI
                                                                                                                          RVI
                                        Average Spearman Rank Correlation  1.0
                                                                           0.8
                                                                           0.6
                                                                           0.4
                                                                           0.2
                                                                           0.0
                                                                           0.2
                                                                           0.4
                                                                           0.6
                                                                           0.8
                                                                           1.0
                                                                                 DI                                       RCVHII                                        PBM

                                                                                                                    (a) Vendramin

                                   1.0                                                    ED       MD           BD  CaD           ChD      CoD       Mean        Match

Average Spearman Rank Correlation  0.8
                                   0.6
                                   0.4
                                   0.2
                                   0.0
                                   0.2
                                   0.4
                                   0.6
                                   0.8
                                   1.0
                                                                           AUCC                        CI                                       SWC                            DBI
                                                                                                                          RVI
                                        Average Spearman Rank Correlation  1.0
                                                                           0.8
                                                                           0.6
                                                                           0.4
                                                                           0.2
                                                                           0.0
                                                                           0.2
                                                                           0.4
                                                                           0.6
                                                                           0.8
                                                                           1.0
                                                                                 DI                                       RCVHII                                        PBM

                                                                                                                    (b) Gagolewski

                                   1.0                                               MSM      SBD          DTW      TWED          ED   MD       CD         Mean         Match

Average Spearman Rank Correlation  0.8
                                   0.6
                                   0.4
                                   0.2
                                   0.0
                                   0.2
                                   0.4
                                   0.6
                                   0.8
                                   1.0
                                                                           AUCC                        CI                                       SWC                            DBI
                                                                                                                          RVI
                                        Average Spearman Rank Correlation  1.0
                                                                           0.8
                                                                           0.6
                                                                           0.4
                                                                           0.2
                                                                           0.0
                                                                           0.2
                                                                           0.4
                                                                           0.6
                                                                           0.8
                                                                           1.0
                                                                                 DI                                       RCVHII                                        PBM

                                                                                                                    (c) UCR

Figure 20: Enhanced boxplots of the distributions of median Pearson correlations between the AMI and various versions of RVIs,
grouped by battery. The boxenplots are presented with no fill for the k-selection task, and filled for the SP-selection task.

                                                                                                                          45
