arXiv:2605.20408v1 [cs.LG] 19 May 2026                                                                                                                                                                   2026-05-19

                                        Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for
                                        Online Preference Alignment

                                        Yinlam Chow1, Guy Tennenholtz2, Ted Yun1, James Harrison1, Arthur Gretton1, Andre Barreto1 and Bo Dai1
                                        1Google DeepMind, 2Google Research

                                        Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) effectively aligns Large Language Models (LLMs)
                                        with aggregate human preferences but often fails to address the diverse and conflicting needs of
                                        individual users. To overcome this issue, we introduce Spectral Souping, a unified framework for efficient,
                                        online preference alignment. Our core contribution is the discovery of a universal spectral representation
                                        within LLMs, which is proven to be highly amenable to model merging. This theoretical insight enables a
                                        two-phase methodology: we first learn a basis of specialized policies offline, each focused on a distinct,
                                        fine-grained preference dimension. An online adaptation algorithm then efficiently "soups" these policies
                                        at inference time, either by merging their outputs or parameters, enabling rapid model adaptation
                                        without the need for costly online retraining w.r.t. tailored preference rewards. Experiments on online
                                        preference alignment benchmarks demonstrate that our method achieves significant performance
                                        improvements over existing state-of-the-art approaches, presenting a scalable and computationally
                                        efficient solution for dynamically adapting LLMs to individual user preferences.

                                        Keywords: personalization, preference alignment, model souping, LLM online adaptation, RLHF

                                        1. Introduction

                                        Recent advancements in LLMs have demonstrated remarkable success in aligning with human prefer-
                                        ences through techniques like RLHF (Ouyang et al., 2022) and Direct Preference Optimization (DPO)
                                        (Rafailov et al., 2023). However, these methods, which rely on a unified reward from aggregated
                                        feedback, face significant limitations. The core issue is that a one-size-fits-all approach fails to ac-
                                        count for the diverse and often conflicting needs of individual users, which stem from differences in
                                        backgrounds and contexts. This gap between generalized and specialized preferences highlights a
                                        critical challenge of aligning LLMs with individual preferences without incurring the substantial data
                                        collection and computational costs associated with fine-tuning a separate model for each user.

                                            Our work introduces Spectral Souping, a novel framework for online personalized preference
                                        alignment of LLMs that overcomes these limitations. Unlike traditional methods, which require
                                        separate and costly fine-tuning, our method can handle the diverse and varying user preferences in
                                        an efficient way. Our core contribution lies in the discovery of a (universal) spectral representation in
                                        the context of the language Markov Decision Process (MDP), where the LLM policy maximizes the
                                        user's preference-driven reward. This observation shows that the logits of various personalized LLM
                                        policies do not exist in an arbitrary space but rather in a structured latent space defined by the MDP's
                                        spectral features, implying these logits can be represented as a linear combination of a small number
                                        of basis logit functions--each corresponds to a policy that aligns with a distinct preference dimension.

                                            This theoretical insight underpins our two-phase LLM-adaptation methodology. An offline phase
                                        trains the aforementioned basis of specialized policies. The online phase then dynamically combines
                                        these basis policies at inference time to generate responses tailored to user preferences, thereby
                                        obviating the need for costly per-user fine-tuning. The resulting framework is highly scalable and
                                        can achieve state-of-the-art performance on online preference alignment benchmarks. Critically,

                                        Corresponding author(s): yinlamchow@google.com
              Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

our discovery of a unified spectral representation enables the derivation of provable sub-optimality
bounds for this policy merging approach--a significant advancement over prior techniques, which
were largely heuristic and lacked such formal guarantees. In particular, we show that our spectral
souping method achieves performance arbitrarily close to that of a fully fine-tuned "tailored" policy,
thus complementing its empirical efficacy with a rigorous theoretical foundation.

    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides background on the language MDP,
RLHF, and the online preference alignment problem. Section 3 details our theoretical discovery of the
spectral representation and its properties related to LLM preference alignment. Section 4 presents our
two-phase methodology, including the offline training of specialized policies and the online souping
algorithm. Section 5 describes our experimental setup and presents our results, demonstrating the
efficacy of spectral souping. Finally, Section 6 delineates related work on LLM adaptation, and Section
7 concludes our work and discusses future directions.

2. Preliminaries

We first provide the basic MDP terminologies of language modeling and define the problem formulation
of online preference alignment.

2.1. The Language MDP and RLHF w.r.t. an Individual Preference

The context of generating a sequence of tokens auto-regressively with an LLM can be modeled as an
MDP, where the state () at timestep  is the sequence of tokens generated so far,  = (0, 1, . . . , -1),
action () at timestep  is the next token to be generated, chosen from a finite vocabulary A, The state
transition is deterministic, i.e., given state  and action , the next state is simply their concatenation:
+1 = concat(, ), and the policy (( |)) is a conditional LLM that we aim to optimize. It gives
the probability of generating token  given the preceding sequence . The goal is to find an optimal
policy  that solves the following maximum entropy (soft) RL problem:

                            -1
                           

              max               (, ) -   ((·|) ref (·|)) ,                                             (1)

              

                           =0

where (, ) is a reward function that scores the quality of generating token  after sequence .

This can be based on human preference feedback or other quality metrics, ref is a reference LLM,
                             (  |  )
and  (ref) =   A (|) log   ref (| )   is       the  Kullback-Leibler  (KL) divergence that  penalizes  the

policy  for deviating too far from the reference model ref, where the temperature parameter  > 0

controls the strength of this regularization.

    Given the deterministic transitions  = (, ), and the fact that the transition terminates at the

final time step , the unique fixed-point solution to this maximum entropy RL problem defines the
optimal policy  in terms of the optimal Q-value function, (, ), that satisfies the soft Bellman
backup and the optimal value function,  (), that serves as normalization (Nachum et al., 2017):

                  (  |  )  =  ref (|)          exp  (, ) -  ()            , ,                          (2)

                                                                      ,

                                                    

              (, ) = (, ) +  (),                                                                       (3)

                                                      (, )

                   () =  log ref (|) exp(                             ),                               (4)

                                                      

where the bellman backup in (3) corresponds to deterministic transitions. This shows that the logits
of the optimal policy are obtained by adding the optimal Q-values to the logits of the reference policy.

                                                                                                       2
                       Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

2.2. Online Preference Alignment as a Multi-objective MDP

Adapting LLMs to satisfy diverse and often conflicting user preferences presents a complex multi-

objective optimization challenge. Unlike in standard RLHF, where the LLM's generation process

is treated as a MDP with a single reward, in online preference alignment, in order to represent a

distinct set of user preferences, like conciseness or factual accuracy, one considers a multi-objective

MDP that involves a preference reward vector, r(, ) = (1(, ), . . . ,  (, ))  , where each of

the  components corresponds to a preference dimension. Suppose for any arbitrary new users,

her preference can be modeled as a linear combination of these multifaceted preference attributes,

i.e., w =       ,      w.r.t.  the  user-specific   preference    vector  w  =  (1, . . . , )          that  lies  in  a
            =1

-dimensional simplex set, characterizing the underlying user-specific importance placed on the

corresponding base rewards. Then a typical approach for learning a tailored LLM is via RLHF

(Das et al., 2024; Kirk et al., 2023b), i.e., max         -1         w (,   )  -    ((·|) ref (·|))          , which
                                                         =0
optimizes a policy w from the feedback signal of a specific reward model w. However, in general this

preference vector w is not revealed to the agent prior to online interactions. Estimating this vector

when concurrently training a corresponding tailored policy via RLHF can be challenging (e.g., beyond

policy optimization one may require advanced exploration strategies to uncover such user preferences

during RL), especially when this procedure is only run for a limited number of steps (e.g., during

online adaptation). Alternatively, training a contextual agent for every possible preference vector w

can also be computationally expensive and impractical for most real-world applications.

3. A Spectral Representation for Online Preference Alignment

This section investigates the parameterization of the optimal value function within the class of

Language MDPs introduced in Section 2.1. Given the reference LLM representation ()  ,

where  the  reference  policy  can  be  expressed   as   ref (|)  =  exp(  ()ref  ())  /          exp(()ref ())

                                                                                          

with the corresponding action token embedding ref()  , our primary goal is to identify the

conditions such that this reference LLM feature can also be a spectral representation that permits a

linear parameterization of the optimal Q-function defined in Equation (3). To facilitate our analysis

of the spectral representation for the optimal Q-function, we introduce two technical assumptions

that provide a practical framework for our analysis:

Assumption 1 (Linear Reward Representation). Given sufficiently expressive features  derived from
the reference LLM, any reward function of the language MDP can be linearly represented by these features:

                        ( ,    )    =    ( ( ,  ))       for some weight vector r.                                 (5)

                                                     r,

Assumption 2 (-step Decodability). The language MDP induced by the reference LLM is -step decodable
for some integer  > 0, whose trajectory distribution depends only on its most recent -step history, i.e., the
distribution of -step trajectory  is conditioned only on sub-sequence -+1: = (-+1, -+1, . . . , ).

    The linear reward assumption is justified by the powerful representational capacity of the reference
LLM. While the true reward dynamics may be arbitrarily complex, the LLM-generated features ()
are rich enough to represent the underlying semantics, allowing the reward itself to be modeled as a
simple linear function. The -step decodability assumption is motivated by the architecture of the
transformer-based reference policy. These models operate on a fixed-length context window, meaning
their outputs are conditioned only on the most recent  tokens. Leveraging these conditions that align
our model with the realistic computational constraints of the LLM, we first have our main technical
result characterizing the optimal Q-function of any reward function that satisfies Assumption 1.

                                                                                                                       3
                                 Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

Lemma 1. For any language MDP, that satisfies Assumption 1 and Assumption 2, its optimal Q function
from Equation 3 can be linearly parameterized with the reference LLM logit feature , i.e., there exists a
vector ,,ref   that depends on temperature , reward , and reference LLM ref such that

                                                   (  ,  )  =   ( ( ,  ))              ,  ,    .                                      (6)

                                                                            ,,ref

Lemma 1 reveals a non-trivial, crucial property of the language MDP: the reference LLM's logit

feature, , acts as a universal spectral representation. This representation allows the optimal Q-

function for any preference-driven reward to be linearly parameterized. Consequently, for a set

of  distinct preference attributes {1(, ), . . . ,  (, )}, their corresponding optimal Q-functions

{1 (,  ),   .  .  .  ,  (,  ) }  can  all  be  expressed       as   (,   )       =   ( ( ,  )),     where   each              is  a  vector

                                                                      

in the spectral space. This insight directly motivates our Spectral Soup policy architecture. The

model employs a shared LLM feature extractor that produces , while integrating multiple lightweight

adapters    at  the  output   logit   layer,  each    specialized    to  learn      a  basis  Q-function    .   A  souped  policy,   ~ ,  is

                                                                                                             

then constructed by linearly combining these Q-functions with a mixture vector  = (1, . . . , )  :

                                                                   

                                                                                                              

                              ~ (|)  ref (|) · exp                            (  ,  )/      ,       | |      .                        (7)

                                                                            

                                                               =1                                 

Here,  > 0 acts as a temperature parameter, normalizing the logit mixture's magnitude, and is
constrained to maintain temperature consistency with the optimal policies. Mathematically, when
the number of basis functions approximates the spectral dimension (  ), parameterizing the
personalized policy via the mixture vector    is equivalent to learning a single spectral feature
vector   . However, our approach of mixing Q-functions offers two advantages. First, the basis of
Q-functions is interpretable, as each  corresponds to a tangible preference attribute. The underlying

                                                                        

spectral representation, in contrast, is often not. This allows us to select a small, relevant subset of
basis functions (  ) that spans most preference-alignment needs, reducing the learning problem's
dimensionality in practice. Second, this framework is flexible; one can easily modify the basis by
adding or removing specialized Q-functions to accommodate new preference attributes. Altering the
spectral representation, however, is difficult as it is an intrinsic property of the reference LLM.

The central goal is to derive a performance sub-optimality bound for the computationally-efficient

spectral soup policy. To establish this bound, for any given user preference vector w we first define

the optimal target. Recall that a user's preference w defines a personalized reward, w (, ) =

     (,              ).  The  optimal  policy,  w ,      that  maximizes         the   KL-regularized     return   for  this  reward  has
=1
the following closed-form solution: w (|)  ref (|) · exp w (, )/ , where w is the optimal

personalized Q-function. The corresponding optimal value function, which represents the maximum

performance utility that can be achieved, is w () =  · log ref (·|) exp w (, )/ . Our approach
approximates this optimal policy with the spectral soup policy ~ in Equation (7), whose logit-mixture
weights  is a solution of the following constrained optimization problem:

                                  -1                                                                               
                                                          | |  (~ (·|) ref (·|)) 0 = 
      (  )  :=    max    ~           w (, ) -                                                             s.t.          | |          . (8)
w,
                                 =0                                                                                             

                                                                                                                   

This problem maximizes the same preference reward w as in RLHF, balanced by a KL penalty whose
regularization strength adapts to the magnitude of the policy mixture. Such a key constraint ensures
the resulting policy's temperature remains within a reasonable range, which is also a necessary
condition for our performance guarantees to hold. The following theorem presents our main technical
result, establishing the formal guarantees for this approximation.

                                                                                                                                          4
                                  Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

Theorem 1 (Sub-optimality Performance Bounds). Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the spectral soup policy
~ in Equation (7), whose weights  solves Equation (8), achieves the following guarantees.

    1. KL Divergence Bound: The divergence from the true optimal policy w is bounded by:

KL (w (·|)                              1                                                                                           
                                                                                                           
                    ~ (·|))                       w ( (, )) 2 + ref ( (, )) 2                          ·          ,w ,ref  -         , ,ref      . (9)

                                                                                                                                              2

    2. Performance Sub-optimality Bound: The gap between the optimal value w () and the value
achieved by the spectral soup policy, w, (), is bounded as:

                                                   -1                                                            | |
                                                                                                   
0            (  )  -        (   )                     ( (, )) 2|0 =                     ·               -           
                      w,
         w                                                                                                         | |

                                                  =0                                                                         2                   (10)

                   +  2                    max{0, -}                 +  ref        [((, )) 2]      ·    ,w ,ref  -                         .
                               ()                                                                                               , ,ref
                                                               

                                                                                                                                        2

Here,  is an auxiliary policy that minimizes the weighted difference of cumulative rewards, i.e.,  

arg min  [          -1  (   (     ,    ))              |      |  (w  -    )  ]  ,  and   ()    :=  log( ()+ ()-1)-log( () · ()),
                   =0                                       
                                                     

where   ()      and    ()          are  the       respective         upper      and     lower  bounds  of  the   policy    ratio   (|)/ref (|).

                         

This technical result marks a significant advancement for policy "souping" methods, which have

largely remained empirically-validated heuristics. Our work establishes one of the first formal sub-

optimality bounds for such a technique, providing a rigorous theoretical foundation to complement its

practical efficacy. Theorem 1 provides this guarantee by first bounding the policy approximation error

(measured by the KL divergence) between our spectral soup policy and the personalized optimal policy

with the logit approximation error, ,w,ref - ( /)                                                  ,,ref 2,  which       captures  how        well  the

                                                                                                 

personalized logit-vector can be represented by a linear combination of the basis vectors (normalized

by the magnitude of the logit-mixture weights). Furthermore, it decomposes the performance gap

into three intuitive error sources: (i) this same logit approximation error; (ii) a reward approximation

error,             (  -  |      |/      |      |  )    2,  capturing      the      mismatch    between     the   user's  true   preference    weights
                                             
                              

{}=1 (which is a simplex vector) and the normalized magnitudes of the learned soup weights
{}=1; and (iii) a penalty for negative logit-mixture weights. This decomposition reveals a critical

insight: if the set of basis logit-vectors is rich enough to span the spectral representation space of all

possible personalized logits, the policy approximation error vanishes entirely. However, the theorem

also highlights a limitation, as the overall performance bound is not tight; it does not go to zero even

when this primary error term is eliminated, due to the remaining reward approximation and penalty

terms. This provides a clear direction for future work on tightening these theoretical guarantees.

Remark 1 (Discovery of Spectral Representation). Our core objective is to find a suitable spectral

representation  that satisfies the above theoretical assumptions, and is amenable to our policy souping

methodology. A first approach is to learn the representation  using an Expectation-Maximization (EM)

style algorithm to satisfy Assumption 1. This process alternates between two main steps until convergence:

(i) With a fixed set of basis reward vectors , we first optimize the representation  by minimizing the
reconstruction error of a weighted reward mixture: min  (,)D  -   · (, ) 2. This
step seeks a representation that allows the  basis vectors to efficiently span the space of personalized

rewards; (ii) With a fixed representation , we update the basis vectors to best reconstruct each individual
reward function by solving: min1,...,   (,)D ( - (, ) )2 . Second, as a practical alter-
native motivated by our value approximation results in Theorem 1, we propose discovering the spectral

representation within a powerful, reference LLM to minimize approximation errors for the mixture of

                                                                                                                                                    5
                                   Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

Q-functions. Instead of learning this representation from scratch, we leverage the rich semantic features

within the model's intermediate transformer layers (the auto-regressive features). Departing from previous

analysis that focuses only the final pre-logit layer, our implementation applies low-rank adapters (LoRA)

(Wang      et   al.,    2023)  to  all  intermediate        layers       when  learning   the    specialized     Q-functions          {1 ,        .  .  .  ,       }.

                                                                                                                                                                 

This strategy reframes the problem from representation learning to representation discovery; the algorithm

automatically searches for and amplifies features from the most suitable layers by updating their LoRA

modules during fine-tuning, allowing the model to identify an optimal spectral representation for each

specialized Q-function. Furthermore, the -weight-mixture approach can be extended to the LoRA modules

in each of the  intermediate layers. This exponentially expands the number of basis Q-functions from 

to , creating a powerful mechanism that can significantly reduce the value approximation error.

4. The Spectral Souping Algorithm for Online Preference Alignment

Motivated by the theoretical guarantees in Theorem 1, we propose a spectral souping algorithm

designed for the rapid and efficient preference alignment of LLMs. The algorithm operates in two

phases: an offline training stage followed by an online adaptation stage. In the first phase, we train a

set  of       specialized      policies,  {1 ,  .  .  .  ,   },  where       each  policy  is  independently           optimized         for         a  single

                                                              

reward attribute . In the second phase, the logit-mixture vector  of the spectral soup policy ~ in

Equation (7) is learned online to combine the specialized policies, tailoring the model's behavior to

a specific user's preferences. This structured composition enables zero-shot generalization to new

users by learning only the low-dimensional mixture vector  at inference time, rather than training a

bespoke policy for each user's underlying preference vector w.

     The      initial   phase   involves       learning     a    set     of    base  policies    {     }  =1.  Within     the      language                MDP

                                                                                                     

framework            (Section   2.1),     each  specialized           policy   is  given   by     (|)            ref (|) exp( (, )/),

                                                                                                   

implying its output logits can be expressed as logit (, ) = logitref (, ) +  (, ). Following

spectral representation theory, the Q-function  (, ) can be optimally parameterized using a

LoRA module applied to the output logit layer of the reference policy ref. A practical challenge

is the lack of granular, token-level rewards. We address this by learning from  offline datasets,

{B}=1, where each dataset contains trajectories annotated with binary labels (e.g., "good" vs.
"bad") for a specific preference attribute. This reframes the task of learning each specialized

policy's parameters, , as a well-studied offline preference alignment problem. Let  () :=

 -1        (    ,    )  =   -1   (,        )   -                 (    )  be  the   cumulative    reward        over       trajectory     ,           derived
=0                         =0                         =1

according to Equation (3). One method, developed from Cui et al. (2025), explicitly learns the

Q-function,  (, ), by minimizing a composite objective. This objective combines a binary loss,
i.e., Binary = -B [ () log ( ()) + (1 -  ()) log(1 - ( ()))], to match trajectory labels
with a Gumbel loss (Garg et al., 2023), i.e., Gumbel = (,)B exp(  (, )/) -  (, )/ - 1 ,
where  (, ) =  (, ) -  (), to ensure soft Bellman consistency. While direct, this approach
is computationally expensive because it requires training an auxiliary value model, . An alter-
native method, inspired by Rafailov et al. (2024), operates on preference pairs (, ) derived from

B, where trajectory  is preferred over trajectory . It optimizes the policy by minimizing the

Bradley-Terry logistic loss: L (; B) = -(,)B [log ( () -  ())]. The key advantage of

this formulation is that the difference in cumulative rewards simplifies to a sum of log-policy ratios,

i.e.,  () -  () =                         log      (, |,)/ref (, |,)                 -           log       (  ,  |  ,  )  /ref  (  ,  |  ,  )  ,  thereby

                                                                                                         

obviating the need for an explicit value function. Although this determines the reward function

only up to a state-dependent potential, this ambiguity does not affect the optimal policy. For its

computational efficiency, we adopt this second method in our work.

    The second phase is online adaptation, via spectral souping, where the policy can be real-
ized through two approaches. The explicit approach directly constructs the policy's logit func-

                                                                                                                                                                   6
Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

tion as a linear combination of the pre-trained specialized and reference logits: logit~ (, ) =
(1 -  ) logitref (, ) +  logit (, ). This follows directly from the definition of the specialized
Q-functions and the spectral soup policy in Equation (7). Alternatively, the implicit approach avoids

instantiating a new model by applying rejection sampling to the reference policy ref. An action is first

sampled from the reference policy,   ref(|), and then accepted if   exp(                                  (log  (|)    -
                                                                                                 =1  
                                                                                                                     

log ref(|))), where  is drawn from a uniform distribution U [0,  ()], and the upper bound can be

simply set to  () = exp(-           (ref  (  ·  |  )  |  |      (·|))/).  While  this  implicit  souping  method  can  be

                                                              

highly efficient, its performance degrades if the personalized policy diverges significantly from the refer-

ence policy, as this leads to a high rejection rate. For both approaches, the spectral soup weights   ,

which tailor the policy to a specific user, are learned efficiently from online user feedback. Mirroring the

offline phase, we can frame the learning problem using preference optimization, where we minimize

a Bradley-Terry loss over weighted preference pairs, LBT (; B) = -B [log (   ( () -  ()))].
Crucially, the learning problem for  reduces to logistic linear regression, allowing for efficient update

via convex optimization methods (Hazan et al., 2016).

5. Experiments

To assess our approach's effectiveness, we conduct empirical evaluations on three realistic LLM online
preference alignment benchmarks. Each experiment involves an offline phase for learning specialized
policies and an online phase for personalization and adaptation.

    Our first experiment is on online LLM preference alignment w.r.t. the UltraFeedback dataset
(Cui et al., 2023), which contains prompts with response pairs annotated with a 4D feature vector
(helpfulness, honesty, instruction-following, and truthfulness). We synthesize diverse preferences by
ranking responses based on the dot product of their feature vector with a unique weight vector w  4.
For the offline phase, we build  = 30 specialized datasets by creating 30 unique weight vectors,
each randomly sampled around the basis attributes. In the online phase, we test generalization
against 5 held-out users proxied by unseen public reward models. To increase difficulty, the dataset is
filtered to only contentious examples (23, 614 train, 401 test) where preferences conflict. The second
experiment focuses on optimizing an LLM's personalized prompt-expansion for text-to-image (T2I)
generation in a 5-turn interactive process (Nabati et al., 2024), where an agent generates new textual
prompts at each turn and inputs that to the environment to return the updated 4x4 image slate. The
system uses Stable Diffusion XL (Podell et al., 2023) for image generation, Gemini 1.5 Flash (Team
et al., 2024a) for prompt expansion, and Gemma 2B (Team et al., 2024b) to model utilities. In the
offline phase, we generate  = 32 datasets from over 30,000 simulated rollouts guided by user models
with myopic, turn-by-turn preferences; a user rates best overall image in each column and chooses
the highest-scoring column. During the online phase, adaptability is tested against 5 held-out users,
each simulated by a pre-trained LTV utility function that models session-level preferences based on
criteria like aesthetics or prompt consistency. Our third experiment is on LLM sleep coaching. Each
synthetic user is instantiated by an LLM grounded in their detailed sleep profiles obtained from 68
real individuals in the LifeSnaps dataset (Yfantidou et al., 2022), following the experimental setup in
Yun et al. (2025). For the offline phase, we generate three (high, medium, low) preference datasets
for each of the Big Five personality dimensions (Goldberg, 1992) (the International Personality Item
Pool (IPIP) version; extraversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness, stability, intellect), resulting in
 = 15 personality types. Each dataset contains 1,000 10-turn conversation pairs, ranked by a reward
function specific to that personality. In the online phase, we evaluate performance on 5 simulated
users (512 samples each), each represented by a Gemini 1.5 Flash auto-rater that scores conversations
based on its specialized rubrics on coaching tone, user understanding, and intervention quality, that
mimics users of different backgrounds and personalities.

                                                                                                                       7
                                         Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

    To evaluate the performance of our spectral souping method, we compare it against a compre-
hensive suite of baselines. The first is the "bespoke" RLHF (Ouyang et al., 2022) agent, which is
trained directly on a specific user's feedback. This approach serves as a practical upper bound for
performance but is computationally expensive and does not generalize across different users. To
tackle the multi-objective nature of the task, Personalized Soups (P-SOUPS) (Jang et al., 2023) trains
multiple specialized policies, each optimized for a single objective. At inference time, it creates
a personalized policy by mixing the model parameters of these specialized policies via a heuristic
weighted average. This technique is analogous to our explicit spectral souping approach. We also
compare against two decoding-time alignment frameworks, which are conceptually similar to our
implicit spectral souping approach. The Personalized Alignment at Decoding-time (PAD) framework
(Chen et al., 2024) guides the decoding process by mixing the model's output distribution based on a
preference reward vector. Inspired by successor features, the PAD-SF variant (Barreto et al., 2018)
re-weights the output distribution using a softmax distribution derived from a learnable K-dimensional
scorer, which operates on a spectral representation, mimics the specialized advantage functions. For
our experiments, the default souping models are based on the Gemma-V3 (Team et al., 2025) 4B, 1B,
270M architectures, implemented with rank-100 LoRA modules on all intermediate layers.

    Our experimental results, summarized in Figures 1 & 2 for GemmaV3 4B and Figures 4 & 5 for
GemmaV3 1B (in Appendix B.3), validate the efficacy of spectral souping across different domains. A
key observation is that implicit and explicit spectral souping methods achieve comparable performance,
with the explicit approach holding a slight edge in several settings. This aligns with our hypothesis that
both methods stem from the same theoretical foundation described in Section 3, but explicit souping is
more precise as it avoids the sampling approximations inherent to the implicit method. Crucially, our
methods consistently approximate the performance of the computationally expensive, tailored RLHF
upper bound, when averaged over all online users, achieving 83% of the optimal performance on
UltraFeedback, 88% on T2I, and 72% on Sleep coaching, thereby empirically confirming our theoretical
sub-optimality bounds. When compared against other baselines, spectral souping demonstrates
significant advantages. It surpasses P-SOUPS, even after tuning the hyper-parameters (the P-SOUPS
weights) used for averaging, underscoring the necessity of merging policies within the structured
spectral representation space rather than an arbitrary parameter space. Similarly, implicit spectral
souping is more stable and performs better than PAD and PAD-SF baselines. This suggests that
guiding the policy mixture with optimal Q-function weights in the spectral representation space is
more effective than using reward weights (as in PAD) or souping weights heuristically developed via
advantage approximations with successor features (as in PAD-SF). Finally, across all held-out users
in both T2I and sleep coaching, spectral souping exhibits faster and more robust online adaptation,
proven to be more data-efficient than all baselines, highlighting its capability in real-world scenarios.

    Our ablation study investigates the impact of reducing the number of offline specialized policies
() on online adaptation performance, with results presented in the scaling-law curves in Figure 3 with
analysis conducted across our 3 domains using the Gemma-V3 4B, 1B and 270M models respectively.
To manage the combinatorial complexity of basis selection of specialized policies, we employed a
leave-one-out elimination approach, randomly selecting and removing one specialized policy at a
time, and averaging the results. The findings reveal several key insights. First, as illustrated in both
figures, reducing the number of basis policies consistently degrades online learning performance
across all domains, as expected. More importantly, we observe a significant performance drop below a
certain threshold for each domain--specifically at  = 7 for UltraFeedback,  = 5 for T2I generation,
and  = 13 for sleep coaching. This suggests the existence of a minimal set of specialized policies is
required to form a basis that effectively span the representation space for various preferences. Second,
the size of this minimal basis set appears correlated with the complexity of the problem's underlying
characteristics; domains like UltraFeedback (4 core attributes) and T2I (5 preference categories)

                                                                                                                                                                                 8
                                         Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

Figure 1 | Test-time Training Performance of Different Methods: Explicit & Implicit Spectral Souping
(SS-Exp & SS-Imp), P-SOUPS, PAD, PAD-SF, RLHF, adapted to 5 various users in the UltraFeedback, T2I
Generation, Sleep Coaching domains. The SS methods (especially SS-Exp) consistently and outperform
P-SOUPS and the PAD baselines, demonstrating superior performance in online adaptation.

Figure 2 | Evaluation Performance of Different Online Adaptation Methods: Explicit & Implicit Spectral
Souping (SS-Exp & SS-Imp), P-SOUPS, PAD, PAD-SF, RLHF, across adapted to 5 various users in
the UltraFeedback, T2I Generation, Sleep Coaching domains. The superior performance of the SS
methods (over P-SOUPS, PAD, and PAD-SF baselines) is also generalizable to online evaluations.

                                                                                                                                                                                 9
                                         Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

require fewer basis policies than the real-world sleep coaching domain, which involves more diverse
and complex auto-rater feedback. Finally, the larger Gemma-V3 4B model exhibits a more gradual
decrease in performance as specialized policies are removed. This suggests that larger pretrained
models capture a more semantically comprehensive spectral representation, making each specialized
policy more expressive and the overall basis more robust to reductions in its span.

Figure 3 | Scaling Laws of SS-Exp to illustrate the effect of model size on performance with an
increasing number of specialized policies across three domains. While performance consistently
improved with model size, the larger (4B) model architecture developed a more comprehensive
spectral representation, making its online adaptation agents more robust to basis reductions.

6. Related Work

Our work is situated at the intersection of LLM preference alignment, RL spectral representation, and
online adaptation. We review the key concepts in these areas that relate to our methods below.

LLM Alignment A dominant approach to aligning LLMs with human preferences is RLHF (Bakker
et al., 2022; Christiano et al., 2017), which involves training a reward model to mimic human feedback
and then using an algorithm like Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) to
fine-tune the LLM. Direct Policy Optimization (DPO) has also emerged as a promising alternative that
simplifies the above process and reduces computational cost. It reformulates the RLHF problem as a
preference-based classification task, optimizing a policy without the need for an explicit reward model.
More recently, research has explored decoding-time alignment as a way to avoid the computational
cost of model training. This includes methods like Controlled Decoding (CD) (Mudgal et al., 2023),
which uses a value-based scorer to guide generation, ARGS (Khanov et al., 2024), which adjusts
probabilistic predictions based on online feedback, and DeAL (Huang et al., 2024) which focuses
on heuristic-guided searches to meet diverse alignment goals. While these methods are powerful,
they often address alignment w.r.t. a single, uniform preference. Our work extends these concepts by
focusing on personalized alignment, which considers the diverse preferences of individual users.

Spectral Representations for RL Representation learning is crucial in RL for abstracting complex
state and action spaces to facilitate policy optimization. Existing methods for learning these repre-
sentations utilize various techniques, including reconstruction (Fujimoto et al., 2023; Hafner et al.,
2019; Watter et al., 2015), successor features (Barreto et al., 2017; Gershman et al., 2012; Kulkarni
et al., 2016), and bisimulation (Ferns and Precup, 2014; Gelada et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2025). A
particularly effective approach involves using spectral decomposition, which has been explored in

                                                                                                                                                                               10
                                         Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

works like Mahadevan and Maggioni (2007) and Ren et al. (2022). These methods often assume
that the environment's transition kernel has a low-rank spectral structure, enabling the use of linear
representations for value functions and leads to provably sample-efficient algorithms (Jin et al.,
2019; Yang and Wang, 2020). Leveraging the above theoretical underpinnings, our work develops a
universal spectral representation in LLMs, whose existence within language MDPs has been proven.
This finding justifies our online adaptation algorithm for personalized preference alignment, which
is designed to only modify the projection vectors within this stable spectral representation, rather
than fine-tuning the entire model. Our approach is distinct from prior work as it connects spectral
representation principles to LLM personalization, a domain where such techniques have not been
previously explored in this manner.

Online Preference Alignment Aligning LLMs with online preferences is crucial to addresses widely-
varying tastes of individual users (Feng et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024; Kirk et al., 2023a; Wang
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024). Existing personalized alignment methods can
be grouped into three categories: (i) Joint optimization of multi-dimensional preference rewards
(Chakraborty et al., 2024; Das et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024b;
Zeng et al., 2023; Zhong et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2025); (ii) Merging model parameters (via linearly
interpolation) or outputs (via mixture-of-expert composition) w.r.t. multiple preference dimensions
(Jang et al., 2023; Park, 2024; Ramé et al., 2024; Wan et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024a); (iii) Prompt-
based methods that use diverse prompts to guide the model toward specific preferences (Hwang
et al., 2023; Jafari et al., 2024; Min et al., 2025; Ravichandran et al., 2025; Trivedi et al., 2025), but
that requires textual preference descriptions. Our work combines the first two approaches, which
formulates the personalized preference alignment as a Multi-objective language MDP, utilizes its
universal spectral representation for LLMs, and develops a theoretically-grounded online adaptation
recipe that unifies both model parameter merging and mixture-of-expert output sampling to effectively
handle different trade-offs on conflicting preferences.

7. Conclusion

This work introduces spectral souping, a principled framework that addresses the critical challenge of
LLM adaptation by discovering a universal spectral representation within the language MDP. This
reveals that diverse policies inhabit a structured, low-dimensional latent space, allowing any special-
ized policy to be effectively represented as a linear combination of a few pre-trained basis policies.
This discovery unlocks an efficient two-phase methodology: an offline phase to train a compact set
of basis policies, followed by an online inference phase where they are dynamically combined to
tailor responses to any user without costly retraining. The efficacy of this approach is validated across
several realistic LLM preference-alignment domains where spectral souping consistently outperforms
state-of-the-art baselines. For instance, it is significantly more data-efficient than two-stage methods
that first infer a tailored reward before applying RLHF, and more stable than alternatives that estimates
the occupancy measures (via successor features) of tailored policies. Crucially, unlike prior heuristic
approaches, our framework is grounded in formal guarantees, providing sub-optimality bounds that
ensure its performance approximates that of a fully fine-tuned LLM. Spectral souping thus offers a
scalable, computationally efficient, and theoretically sound solution for online adaptation of LLMs.

    This work opens several promising avenues for future research. One key direction is to learn
an optimal spectral representation directly during pre-training, embedding a universal basis for
diverse human preferences into the foundation model itself to make it inherently more adaptable.
Another avenue involves analyzing more sophisticated online adaptation algorithms, such as non-
linear souping techniques or meta-learning approaches, to infer user needs more rapidly from sparse

                                                                                                                                                                               11
                                         Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

feedback. Finally, extending the principles of spectral souping to other modalities (beyond LLMs),
including personalized text-to-image generation, presents an exciting opportunity to generalize this
framework, enabling robust personalization across a wide range of creative and practical domains.

References

M. Bakker, M. Chadwick, H. Sheahan, M. Tessler, L. Campbell-Gillingham, J. Balaguer, N. McAleese,
  A. Glaese, J. Aslanides, M. Botvinick, et al. Fine-tuning language models to find agreement
   among humans with diverse preferences. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:
  38176­38189, 2022.

A. Barreto, W. Dabney, R. Munos, J. J. Hunt, T. Schaul, H. P. van Hasselt, and D. Silver. Successor
   features for transfer in reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  30, 2017.

A. Barreto, D. Borsa, J. Quan, T. Schaul, D. Silver, M. Hessel, D. Mankowitz, A. Zidek, and R. Munos.
  Transfer in deep reinforcement learning using successor features and generalised policy improve-
   ment. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 501­510. PMLR, 2018.

S. Chakraborty, J. Qiu, H. Yuan, A. Koppel, F. Huang, D. Manocha, A. S. Bedi, and M. Wang. Maxmin-
   rlhf: Alignment with diverse human preferences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08925, 2024.

R. Chen, X. Zhang, M. Luo, W. Chai, and Z. Liu. Pad: Personalized alignment of llms at decoding-time.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.04070, 2024.

P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, and D. Amodei. Deep reinforcement learning
   from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

G. Cui, L. Yuan, N. Ding, G. Yao, W. Zhu, Y. Ni, G. Xie, Z. Liu, and M. Sun. Ultrafeedback: Boosting
   language models with high-quality feedback. 2023.

G. Cui, L. Yuan, Z. Wang, H. Wang, W. Li, B. He, Y. Fan, T. Yu, Q. Xu, W. Chen, et al. Process
   reinforcement through implicit rewards. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01456, 2025.

N. Das, S. Chakraborty, A. Pacchiano, and S. R. Chowdhury. Active preference optimization for sample
   efficient rlhf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10500, 2024.

S. Feng, T. Sorensen, Y. Liu, J. Fisher, C. Y. Park, Y. Choi, and Y. Tsvetkov. Modular pluralism: Pluralistic
   alignment via multi-llm collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15951, 2024.

N. Ferns and D. Precup. Bisimulation metrics are optimal value functions. In UAI, pages 210­219,
  2014.

S. Fujimoto, W.-D. Chang, E. Smith, S. S. Gu, D. Precup, and D. Meger. For sale: State-action
   representation learning for deep reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing
   systems, 36:61573­61624, 2023.

D. Garg, J. Hejna, M. Geist, and S. Ermon. Extreme q-learning: Maxent rl without entropy. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2301.02328, 2023.

C. Gelada, S. Kumar, J. Buckman, O. Nachum, and M. G. Bellemare. Deepmdp: Learning continuous
   latent space models for representation learning. In International conference on machine learning,
   pages 2170­2179. PMLR, 2019.

                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                         Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

S. J. Gershman, C. D. Moore, M. T. Todd, K. A. Norman, and P. B. Sederberg. The successor
   representation and temporal context. Neural Computation, 24(6):1553­1568, 2012.

L. R. Goldberg. The development of markers for the big-five factor structure. Psychological assessment,
  4(1):26, 1992.

D. Hafner, T. Lillicrap, J. Ba, and M. Norouzi. Dream to control: Learning behaviors by latent
   imagination. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.01603, 2019.

J. L. Hau, M. Petrik, and M. Ghavamzadeh. Entropic risk optimization in discounted mdps. In
   International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 47­76. PMLR, 2023.

E. Hazan et al. Introduction to online convex optimization. Foundations and Trends® in Optimization,
  2(3-4):157­325, 2016.

J. Y. Huang, S. Sengupta, D. Bonadiman, Y.-a. Lai, A. Gupta, N. Pappas, S. Mansour, K. Kirchhoff, and
   D. Roth. Deal: Decoding-time alignment for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06147,
  2024.

E. Hwang, B. P. Majumder, and N. Tandon. Aligning language models to user opinions. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2305.14929, 2023.

Y. Jafari, D. Mekala, R. Yu, and T. Berg-Kirkpatrick. Morl-prompt: An empirical analysis of multi-
   objective reinforcement learning for discrete prompt optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.11711,
  2024.

J. Jang, S. Kim, B. Y. Lin, Y. Wang, J. Hessel, L. Zettlemoyer, H. Hajishirzi, Y. Choi, and P. Ammanabrolu.
   Personalized soups: Personalized large language model alignment via post-hoc parameter merging.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11564, 2023.

L. Jiang, T. Sorensen, S. Levine, and Y. Choi. Can language models reason about individualistic human
  values and preferences? arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.03868, 2024.

Y. Jin, W. Fu, J. Kang, J. Guo, and J. Guo. Bayesian symbolic regression. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1910.08892, 2019.

M. Khanov, J. Burapacheep, and Y. Li. Args: Alignment as reward-guided search. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2402.01694, 2024.

H. R. Kirk, A. M. Bean, B. Vidgen, P. Röttger, and S. A. Hale. The past, present and better future of
   feedback learning in large language models for subjective human preferences and values. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2310.07629, 2023a.

H. R. Kirk, B. Vidgen, P. Röttger, and S. A. Hale. Personalisation within bounds: A risk taxonomy and
   policy framework for the alignment of large language models with personalised feedback. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2303.05453, 2023b.

T. D. Kulkarni, A. Saeedi, S. Gautam, and S. J. Gershman. Deep successor reinforcement learning.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.02396, 2016.

J. Li, F. Zhou, S. Sun, Y. Zhang, H. Zhao, and P. Liu. Dissecting human and llm preferences. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2402.11296, 2024.

S. Mahadevan and M. Maggioni. Proto-value functions: A laplacian framework for learning repre-
   sentation and control in markov decision processes. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 8(10),
  2007.

                                                                                                                                                                               13
                                         Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

E. Min, H.-Y. Huang, X. Yang, M. Yang, X. Jia, Y. Wu, H. Cai, J. Wang, S. Wang, and D. Yin. From
   prompting to alignment: A generative framework for query recommendation. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2504.10208, 2025.

S. Mudgal, J. Lee, H. Ganapathy, Y. Li, T. Wang, Y. Huang, Z. Chen, H.-T. Cheng, M. Collins, T. Strohman,
   et al. Controlled decoding from language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17022, 2023.

O. Nabati, G. Tennenholtz, C. Hsu, M. Ryu, D. Ramachandran, Y. Chow, X. Li, and C. Boutilier.
   Preference adaptive and sequential text-to-image generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10419,
  2024.

O. Nachum, M. Norouzi, K. Xu, and D. Schuurmans. Bridging the gap between value and policy based
   reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.

L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama,
  A. Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in
   neural information processing systems, 35:27730­27744, 2022.

S. Park. Learning more generalized experts by merging experts in mixture-of-experts. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2405.11530, 2024.

D. Podell, Z. English, K. Lacey, A. Blattmann, T. Dockhorn, J. Müller, J. Penna, and R. Rombach.
   Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion models for high-resolution image synthesis. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2307.01952, 2023.

R. Rafailov, A. Sharma, E. Mitchell, C. D. Manning, S. Ermon, and C. Finn. Direct preference
   optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural information
   processing systems, 36:53728­53741, 2023.

R. Rafailov, J. Hejna, R. Park, and C. Finn. From  to : Your language model is secretly a -function.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12358, 2024.

A. Ramé, J. Ferret, N. Vieillard, R. Dadashi, L. Hussenot, P.-L. Cedoz, P. G. Sessa, S. Girgin, A. Douillard,
   and O. Bachem. Warp: On the benefits of weight averaged rewarded policies. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2406.16768, 2024.

B. Ravichandran, D. Joy, P. Elliott, B. Hu, J. Adams, C. Funk, E. Veenhuis, A. Hoogs, and A. Basharat.
  Align: Prompt-based attribute alignment for reliable, responsible, and personalized llm-based
   decision-making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.09037, 2025.

T. Ren, T. Zhang, L. Lee, J. E. Gonzalez, D. Schuurmans, and B. Dai. Spectral decomposition
   representation for reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.09515, 2022.

J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
   algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.

G. Team, P. Georgiev, V. I. Lei, R. Burnell, L. Bai, A. Gulati, G. Tanzer, D. Vincent, Z. Pan, S. Wang,
   et al. Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understanding across millions of tokens of context. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2403.05530, 2024a.

G. Team, M. Riviere, S. Pathak, P. G. Sessa, C. Hardin, S. Bhupatiraju, L. Hussenot, T. Mesnard,
   B. Shahriari, A. Ramé, et al. Gemma 2: Improving open language models at a practical size. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2408.00118, 2024b.

                                                                                                                                                                               14
                                         Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

G. Team, A. Kamath, J. Ferret, S. Pathak, N. Vieillard, R. Merhej, S. Perrin, T. Matejovicova, A. Ramé,
   M. Rivière, et al. Gemma 3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19786, 2025.

P. Trivedi, S. Chakraborty, A. Reddy, V. Aggarwal, A. S. Bedi, and G. K. Atia. Align-pro: A principled
   approach to prompt optimization for llm alignment. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
   Artificial Intelligence, volume 39, pages 27653­27661, 2025.

F. Wan, X. Huang, D. Cai, X. Quan, W. Bi, and S. Shi. Knowledge fusion of large language models.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10491, 2024.

H. Wang, Y. Lin, W. Xiong, R. Yang, S. Diao, S. Qiu, H. Zhao, and T. Zhang. Arithmetic control of llms
   for diverse user preferences: Directional preference alignment with multi-objective rewards. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2402.18571, 2024.

X. Wang, L. Aitchison, and M. Rudolph. Lora ensembles for large language model fine-tuning. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2310.00035, 2023.

M. Watter, J. Springenberg, J. Boedecker, and M. Riedmiller. Embed to control: A locally linear latent
   dynamics model for control from raw images. Advances in neural information processing systems,
  28, 2015.

E. Yang, L. Shen, G. Guo, X. Wang, X. Cao, J. Zhang, and D. Tao. Model merging in llms, mllms,
   and beyond: Methods, theories, applications and opportunities. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.07666,
  2024a.

H. Yang, L. He, M. Hou, S. Shen, R. Li, J. Hou, J. Ma, and J. Zhao. Aligning llms through multi-
   perspective user preference ranking-based feedback for programming question answering. arXiv
   preprint arXiv:2406.00037, 2024b.

L. Yang and M. Wang. Reinforcement learning in feature space: Matrix bandit, kernels, and regret
   bound. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 10746­10756. PMLR, 2020.

S. Yfantidou, C. Karagianni, S. Efstathiou, A. Vakali, J. Palotti, D. P. Giakatos, T. Marchioro, A. Kazlouski,
   E. Ferrari, and S. Girdzijauskas. LifeSnaps, a 4-month multi-modal dataset capturing unobtrusive
   snapshots of our lives in the wild. Sci. Data, 9(1):663, Oct. 2022.

T. Yun, E. Yang, M. Safdari, J. H. Lee, V. V. Kumar, S. S. Mahdavi, J. Amar, D. Peyton, R. Aharony, A. M.
   PhD, L. D. Schneider, I. Galatzer-Levy, Y. Jia, J. Canny, A. Gretton, and M. Mataric. Sleepless nights,
   sugary days: Creating synthetic users with health conditions for realistic coaching agent interactions.
   In W. Che, J. Nabende, E. Shutova, and M. T. Pilehvar, editors, Findings of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025, pages 14159­14181, Vienna, Austria, July 2025. Association
   for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-256-5. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-acl.729.

  URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-acl.729/.

D. Zeng, Y. Dai, P. Cheng, L. Wang, T. Hu, W. Chen, N. Du, and Z. Xu. On diversified preferences of
   large language model alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07401, 2023.

H. Zhang, T. Ren, C. Xiao, D. Schuurmans, and B. Dai. Provable representation with efficient planning
   for partial observable reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12244, 2023.

L. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Li, and Y.-H. Li. Revisiting bisimulation metric for robust representations in
   reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.18519, 2025.

                                                                                                                                                                               15
                                         Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

S. Zhang, D. Yu, H. Sharma, H. Zhong, Z. Liu, Z. Yang, S. Wang, H. Hassan, and Z. Wang. Self-
   exploring language models: Active preference elicitation for online alignment. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:2405.19332, 2024.

Y. Zhong, C. Ma, X. Zhang, Z. Yang, H. Chen, Q. Zhang, S. Qi, and Y. Yang. Panacea: Pareto
   alignment via preference adaptation for llms. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  37:75522­75558, 2024.

L. Zhu, F. Guo, G. Cai, and Y. Ma. Structured preference modeling for reinforcement learning-based
   fine-tuning of large models. Journal of Computer Technology and Software, 4(4), 2025.

                                                                                                                                                                               16
                             Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

A. Derivations of Results in Section 3

A.1. Proof of Lemma 1

Given the reference LLM representation ()   and an action token embedding ref()  , the ref-
                                                                                                      ))/
erence  policy     is  expressed    as  a  softmax    function:    (|)         =  exp(   ( )  ref  (                  exp(()ref ()).
                                                                                                               

We   can  also     rewrite   the    inner    product     using     the   identity  ()ref ()           =   -        1  (    ()   -     ref () 2     -
                                                                                                                   2
() 2 - ref() 2). Substituting this into the reference policy equation reveals a Gaussian kernel:

ref (|)  exp           -  1  ()     -   ref () 2  , which measures the similarity between the state and action
                          2

embeddings. To create a more tractable linear representation, we approximate this Gaussian kernel

using Random Fourier Features (RFF). RFF approximates a continuous shift-invariant kernel with an

inner product of randomized feature maps. Applying this technique yields a spectral representation

of the reference LLM policy:

                                             ref (|)  =        (), ref, () ()                                                                   (11)

                                                              (),           ref, () ()

                                                                     

Here, the expectation ·, · () is over a random frequency vector   N (0, ), and the feature maps

are  defined     as:    ()   =      exp(-(        ))  exp  (  1    (  )    2)  ,  ref, ()  =  exp  (  ref          ())     exp  (  1    ref  (  )  2)
                                                              2                                                                    2

This spectral representation transforms the non-linear kernel into a linear inner products in a ran-

domized feature space, providing a direct path toward understanding the conditions under which the

corresponding optimal Q-function can also be represented linearly.

    To prove this technical lemma, we start by understanding the L-step decodability condition in
Assumption 2. Consider the optimal Bellman equation for (, ) in Equation 3, which can be easily

derived by unrolling the one-step Bellman equation forward in time for  steps and using the time
consistency property of exponential risk measure Hau et al. (2023) log ref exp((, )/), and the
fact that the transition dynamics of the language MDP is deterministic  = (, ):

                                                                         1  +-1                  

                                                                                               

              (    ,   )  =   (  ,   )  +    log  ref,+1:+-1     exp               (  ,  )  +      (  +,  +)               , ,  .               (12)

                                                                            =+1

According to the -step decodability assumption, the function (+, +) from the above formulation
is directly independent to the earlier history  = (0, 0, 1, . . . , -1) and . However, the forward
steps are conducted according to the policy ref,+1:+-1 = {ref (·|+1), . . . , ref (·|+-1)} still depends
on parts of , hence the distribution in the above expectation still retains a dependence on .

    To further study the dependence on history of this optimal Q-function, we introduce a final

observation: For the reference policy ref in Equation (11), under the L-step decodability assumption
there exists a corresponding policy ref, known as the moment matching policy, that conditions
on a sufficient latent variable (the reference LLM representation) to generate the same expected

observation dynamics while being independent of history older than  steps Zhang et al. (2023). Now,

with this observation we consider the -step auto-regressive distribution induced by the reference
policy ref, i.e., ref (+1:+, +1:+|, ). Under -step decodability, for any arbitrary state-action
pair (, ) at any step , this forward distribution emits the following spectral decomposition:

     ref (+1:+, +1:+ |, )                    =              (, ), ref, (+1:+, +1:+)N ()                                                         (13)
                                                                                                                                ,

                                                 (, ),  ref, (+1:+, +1:+)+1:++1:+N ()

When modeling the state-action pairs in the next   {1, . . . , } steps, the above expression uses the
moment matching trick, which uses the policy ref that only depends on the latent variable and is

                                                                                                                                                   17
                                  Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

independent of (, ). Under this policy, ref, (+1:+, +1:+), is then a function that maps to the
latent space by construction and is independent of history, leading to the above spectral representation.

Utilizing this result, one can re-write Equation (12) as

    (  ,   )     -   (  ,    )



                                                           1  +-1                      (+,
= log
                                                               

              ref (+1:+, +1:+ |, ) exp                                    (  ,  )  +             +)      +1:+  +1:+

                                                              =+1

          (, ), ref, (+1:+, +1:+)N () exp                                       1  +-1     (  ,  )   +   (+,    +)   +1:+  +1:+
                                                                                   =+1

= log                                      (, ),  ref, (+1:+, +1:+)+1:++1:+N ()

           (,                ) ,          (                )  exp  (  1     +-1     (  ,  )  +   (+,    +))N ()
                                                                            =+1
                                  ref  ,     +1:+,  +1:+                                                             +1:+  +1:+

=  log                                     (, ),  ref, (+1:+, +1:+)+1:++1:+N ()

                                                                         1  +-1                    
           (, ),
                                                                                                 

                                  ref, (+1:+, +1:+) exp                             (  ,  )  +       (  +,  +)   +1:+  +1:+

                                                                            =+1                                               N ()

= log                                                     ,,=exp( -,  ) exp( ,  2/2), for some , 

                                                                                                                                    ,

                                           (, ), ref, (+1:+, +1:+)+1:++1:+N ()

                                                         ref,=exp( -ref ) exp( ref 2/2), for some ref

where the first equality follows directly from the definitions of the optimal Q-function and the forward
distribution in Equation (13), the second equality follows from the linear property of the Fourier
spectral representation, which is characterized by an inner product ·, · () in the frequency space,
and the third equality follows from algebraic operations of the corresponding random Fourier feature
maps. The above arguments further imply that

              (     ,    )  - (, )           =    · log  exp(( (, )), )            = ( (, )) (,              - ref) · , ,  .
                                                          exp(((, ))ref)
          

This further implies that  (, ) = ( (, )),,ref with ,,ref = r + ,  - ref, meaning that
the optimal Q-function can be linearly parametrized with the reference LLM feature  under these
conditions, completing the proof of this lemma.

                                                                                                                              18
                                     Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

A.2. Proof of Theorem 1

For any base and spectral soup temperatures ,  > 0, logit-mixture vector   , recall the

spectral soup policy ~ (|)  ref (|) exp(                                                        (  ,  )/        ),  the      personalized               policy    w (|)           

                                                                                              

ref (|) exp(w (, )/), i.e., KL (w (·|)||~ (·|)), the personalized value function

       ()    =  max              -1                                                                                 =  · log ref (· |)                  exp w (, )          ,
                                                                                                                                                                  
w                               
                                    w (, ) -   ((·|) ref (·|)) |0 = 

                                 =0

and notice that the spectral soup policy has the following optimal value function:

                                         -1                                                                                                               
                                                                         | | ·  (~ (·|) ref (·|)) |0 =                                                        | |
             (  )  :=   max      ~          w (, ) -                                                                                         s.t.                        
    w,
                                        =0                                                                                                                              .

                                                                                                                                                          

    First, we aim to compute an upper bound for the KL divergence between the spectral soup policy
and the personalized policy, i.e., KL(w (·|)||~ (·|)). Expanding the KL divergence term, we obtain
the following inequality for any logit-mixture vector   :

0  KL (w (·|) ||~ (·|)) = w (·|)                                     log w (|)
                                                                          ~ (|)

                                              w (, ) - w ()                                                                  (  ,  )                                       (, )
                                                                                                                                                                              
=w (· |)           log ref (|)          +                                    -   log ref (|) +                                        - log ref (· |)           exp
                                                                                                                         

             w (,       )                       (  ,  )                                                             (  ,  )                                     w (,     )
                                                                                                                                                                    
=w                            -                             +     log ref (· |) exp                                             -  log ref (· |)          exp

                                                                                                              

                                 

1                                                                                                             

   w [( (, ))] 2 +  ref |( (, )) | 2 ·  ,w,ref -  ,,ref ,                                                                                                                (14)

                                                                                                                                          2

where the last inequality follows from Lemma 1 and the Lipchitz property of the log ref exp()

function (with Lipschitz constant 1). Second, we aim to derive the performance sub-optimality
bound with respect to the personalized-soup value function w, (), and personalized value function
w (). By the above definitions, we can easily argue that (i) w ()  w, () as the personalized-soup

optimization problem always has a lower objective value than that of the personalized RLHF problem,
                                
and    (ii)  w ,     ()              (  )  ,          {1,   .  .  .  ,   },  as  the   right         hand     side       of  this  inequality           can  be   recovered
                              w,
by setting the logit mixture vector  as the corresponding one-hot vector with magnitude / > 0 at

the -th attribute. Furthermore, based on the assumption of non-negative rewards r, which implies
                                                                                                                      
that   all   optimal       value     functions        (w ,     w ,        ,     but  not      necessarily                       since  it    is  not    an  optimal    value
                                                                                                                    w,
                                                                          

function) are also non-negative. With /(                                           | |)         1,    we    can     therefore         express      the    sub-optimality

                                                                                      

performance bound of the personalized-soup policy at any state  as

                                     |   |                                      | |                          ()               ()

w   (  )     w,      (  )                       |  w,    (  )  =                         w,          ()  -                +    

                                         |                                        | |
                                                                          

                              | |                                                         ()                           | |                                         (,          )
                                                                        + 
                                        w,         ()    -        ()                                     -                      log  ref                exp          

                                | |                                                                                                              (· |)                 | |

                                                                                                                                                                          

                                                                                                                  

                                            (  )                                                                                    (  )

                                     | |                                           (, )                                                          w (, )                
                                                                                                                                                     
                           +                  log  ref (· |)            exp                           -         log      ref              exp                     +  w   (  )

                                                                                           |      |                                (· |)                                       .

                                                                                                

                                 

                                                                                            ()

                                                                                                                                                                               19
                                             Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

This performance bound can further be simplified via the following sequence of inequalities:

                                                   ( /) ()                                                                                                      ( /)                   
                                                                                                                                                                                       
w,      (  )     w      (  )  +       ()       +                                 -    ref |( (,                       )) | 2 ,w,ref                   -                                     ,     ,ref    2

                                                                                                                                                                               

                 -1                                                                            |      |                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                            ()                                                                                     
w () -   [( (, )) 2|] w -                                                                                          +                    -    ref |( (, )) | 2 ,w,ref                                         -                  , ,ref  2
                                                                                                  | |
                 =0                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          

                 -1                                                                                        |       |                  2                                      
                                                                                                                                      
w () -   [( (, )) 2|0 = ] · w -                                                                                                    +        ·                      ()   (      )-
                                                                                                              | |
                 =0                                                                                                                                                          

                                                                                                             2                                    

                                                                                                                   ( /)                   

                                 -      ref           | ( ( ,        ) ) |  2           ·     ,w ,ref         -                                ,,ref 2,                                                                 (15)

                                                                                                                                          

                                                                                                                                      

where the first inequality follows from the derivations in Equation (9), i.e., Lipschitz continuity of
                                                                                                                                     /(                
log ref exp(),             and            the  convexity                   of      the     function              ()         =                     |       |  )  ,  /(                | |)           1   i.e.,
                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                        

                                                                                                         (,   )                                                            w (, )
                                                                                                                                                                               
         ()    =              |        |  log  ref (· |)                exp                                           -        log      ref                        exp

                                                                                            | |                                                      (    ·  |  )

                                                                                                  

                                                                                                           (,   )            /          |  |                                                      w (,          )
                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                           

               =              |        |  log  ref                         exp                                                                 -             log     ref (· |)           exp

                                                            (  ·  |  )                                                                               

                                   

                        

                      ·  | |                                                                              (,               )                                                           w    (,      )
                                                  log     ref (· |) exp                                                            -          log    ref (· |)                 exp          
                                                                                                                                        
                                    | |
                                                                                                              

                                                                                                                          
                                                                                   
                     -   ref              | ( ( ,     ))|2                 ·              ,w ,ref        -                  ,,ref 2,

                                                                                                                          

                                                                                                                

, the second inequality follows from utilizing the definitions of value functions in the soft MDP:

                        | |                                                                                                            -1                                            

                                       (w, ()                ())                            1                                         
   () :=                                                                                    | |
                          | |                          -                         =                              |       |                  ( (, )) |0 =                                  w - 
                                                                                                                                 
                         
                                                                                                                                      =0

     1                         -1
                                                                  
                                                                                   
               min                        (  (     ,    ))                    |      |     w -                  |0 = 
     |      |
                 

                              =0                                     

     1                -1                                                                                                        -1                                                                              |       |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                  )                                                                                                                                                          
=                                (  (          )            |           |     w -                     |0 =               -  [( (, )) 2|] · w -
     |      |                             ,                                                                                                                                                                        |      |    ,
                                                                                                                               =0
                     =0                                                                                                                                                                                                      2

and assume both the linear parameterization rewards in Assumption 1 and the existence of a minimal

policy over the mixture of reward differences   arg min                                                                                     -1               (  (    ,     )  )       | |         w -                   |0 =  ,
                                                                                                                                           =0
                                                                                                                                                                                      

and the third inequality follows from a hypothesis that there exists  ()  0 such that the following

property holds (such a technical result will be derived in the remaining part of the proof):

                                                                           | |                                                                    (,      )                                         )

               ()    :=                         (  )  -                              log       ref (· |)              exp                                                  ·             (  )  (                        (16)

                                                                                                                                               |       |                                                -    .

                                                                                                                                                    

                                                                                                                                                                               

                                                                                                                                                                                         0

    To show that Equation (16) holds, first consider the following upper-bound of 1/, with 0   
  , with respect to an arbitrary anchor point     , such that | - |  ||, :

                 1 = 1 -  -  + ( - )2 1  1 -  -  + ( - )2 1
                   2                                        2   2                                                           2 

                 1                     ( -     )2           1 -  -                               2 -                        1                  2 -  2                                          2 - 
                                                   )                                           =
                           

        =                          (         2                  2                                        2                  (- )2         =                                              =                         .
                                                                                                                               2                     2  (2 - )  (2 - )
                           =0                                                                                      1-

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20
                             Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

Substituting to the above inequality

                                 (, )                                                      (, )
                   = exp                              =  () · ref exp                        
                                                ,                                                            ,
                                                                                               

                                                         (, )                                                             (, )
                   =  () · ref exp                                               =  () · ref exp                           
                                                                       ,                                                                   ,
                                                                                                                             

for  the  importance-sampling          (IS)        factor    ()    :=        (  |  )/ref     (  |  )  ,  IS     lower    bound            (),       and  IS  upper

                                                                         

bound  (), where 0   ()  1,  ()  1,  ()  [ (),  ()], and taking expectation ref on

both sides, this expression becomes

          ref (· |)          1                           2 () - 1                                  1                                                            (17)
                                                    () (2 () -  ()) ref (·|)                       exp

                              (,)                                                                                (,)
                                       
                        exp                                                                                        
                     
                                                                                                                    

                                       

     =    log ref (· |)             1               log            2 () - 1                     - log ref (· |)                       (, )
                                                              () (2 () -  ())                                                   exp 

                                       ( , )                                                                                              
                                                
                             exp                
                           

                                                
                                       - (, )                                                    (, )
     = - log ref (·|) exp                                    log ref (· |) exp                                     -  log             2 () - 1
                                                                                                                                   () (2 () -  ())                .
                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                             

                                                                                                                                          ()

                                                                                                                                           

The above bound is only valid when  ()  0. We will achieve that and also minimize  () by
                                                                                                                                                         

choosing the right  (). Notice that, since 0   ()  1 and 1   (), the expression exp  () =

                                                                                                                                                                                      

      2 () -1        1  only    when           ()       1   (1  +   ()),     and      this   value       would        monotonically                 increase    with
 () (2 () - () )                                        2

 beyond that. However, to satisfy the necessary condition -||   -   ||, , that guarantees the

convergence of the above geometric sum, for     , the smallest  value can only be ( + )/2, or

in other words the smallest possible  is ( () +  ())/2, which is a valid choice as it is greater than

(1 +  ())/2. Substituting  = ( () +  ())/2 into  () yields

                                                                                                           

                         ()     :=     ()          =  log( ()      +    ()         -  1)  -  log( ()            ·   ())             0.                          (18)

                                        

If  () is constructed via Equation (18), then the inequality in Equation (16) can be proven by using
the convexity arguments and definitions of  via the following inequalities:

                                                                                       

     1                          1                                                        (, )
      | |                        | |                                               exp 
                     (  )  =                            log     ref (· |)
                                                                                             
                                                     

                                  

                                1                                                                               sgn() (, )                                        )
                                                            (sgn(      )  )  log  ref                 exp                                        +       ()  (
                                                                                                                                                                  
                                    |      |                                                (· |)                                                                    -
                                                          
                                                                                                                           
                                
                                                

                                              | |                                     sgn() (, )                                (  )  (    )  -
                           =
                                                      log   ref (· |)        exp                                      +                    
                             
                                                | |                                                                                   | |
                                                                                                                                    

                            log ref (· |) exp                      | |sgn(          )     (,    )        +               ()  (      )-

                                                                                                                                  

                                                                                  | |                                    | |

                                                                                                                            

                           = log ref (· |) exp                      (,          )     +            () (          )-

                                                                                                               

                                                                          | |                            | |          ,

                                                                                                            

where the first equality follows from the definition of (), the first inequality follows from the

                                                                                                                

arguments in Equation (17) applied to the cases when  < 0 (with equality holds trivially when

                                                                                                                 

                                                                                                                                                                     21
                                         Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

  0), the second and third equalities follows from simple algebra, the second inequality follows

  

from convex property of the function log ref exp().
    Combining all these arguments complete the proof of this theorem.

                                                                                                                                                                               22
                                         Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

B. Experiment Details

B.1. Experimental Domains

To assess the effectiveness of our approach, we conduct empirical evaluations of spectral souping
on three realistic LLM personalization experiments. Each experiment contain two phases, an offline
learning phase of specialized policies and an online adaptation phase for LLM personalization.

    The first experiment is built upon the UltraFeedback dataset, which initially contains a training
set of 60,829 examples and a test set of 985 examples. Each data point consists of an input prompt
 and a pair of distinct agent responses, ( 1, 2), where each response  is annotated with a four-
dimensional feature vector, (, ), quantifying its helpfulness, honesty, instruction-following, and
truthfulness. We leverage this fine-grained scores to synthesize diverse preference labels, each with
a unique weight vector w  4. Pairwise preference rankings of two responses is determined by
the dot product of their feature vectors with this weight vector; for instance, 1 is preferred over
2 if (, 1), w > (, 2), w. In the offline phase, we build a library of  = 30 specialized
policies. We generate 30 distinct datasets by creating 30 unique preference vectors, w, each sampled
from a distribution centered around a basis vector for one of the four attributes (e.g., [1, 0, 0, 0] for
helpfulness). The online phase evaluates the algorithm's generalization to novel preferences under
ambiguous conditions. On the same dataset of prompts and responses, we simulate responses of eight
held-out "users," proxied by publicly available reward models. Crucially, the preference functions
of these models were unseen during offline training, providing a rigorous test of generalization. To
further amplify the task's difficulty, we filter the dataset to retain only the most contentious examples
where preferences conflict, resulting in a benchmark of 23, 614 training and 401 test examples,
forcing the model to learn nuanced preference trade-offs.

    The second experimental setup focuses on personalized text-to-image (T2I) generation within
the PASTA framework, which involves a 5-turn (H=5) interactive process. At each turn, the agent
presents the user with a 4x4 slate of 16 images, where each column corresponds to a unique prompt
expansion. The core generation models include Stable Diffusion XL for images and Gemini 1.5 Flash
for creating a candidate set of 25 prompts, from which the four are selected for the slate. The utility
functions are based on fine-tuned Gemma 2B models. For the offline learning phase, we generated
K=32 specialized datasets from over 30,000 simulated user rollouts, totaling more than 2.5 million
images. These rollouts were guided by 32 distinct user models designed to capture myopic, turn-
by-turn preferences. In this simulation, a user provides an absolute satisfaction score (on a 5-point
scale) for the best image in each column based on its relevance to the original prompt. The choice
is then modeled as selecting the column that received the highest score. In the online phase, the
algorithm's adaptability is tested against 5 held-out, simulated users. Each of these "auto-raters"
is powered by a unique, pre-trained Q-function that models a holistic, session-level preference. In
contrast to the myopic offline models, these Q-functions evaluate the entire 5-turn session based on
salient user values, such as aesthetic quality, prompt-image consistency, or a specific artistic style.
These user-mimicking Q-functions were trained on a large offline dataset using Implicit Q-Learning.

    Our third experiment is grounded in the healthcare domain of sleep coaching. We begin by
obtaining detailed user profiles from 68 real individuals from the LifeSnaps dataset. Each profile
is constructed using a rich set of attributes, including demographics (age, gender), health metrics
(BMI, average and variable sleep duration). From these attributes, we generate a 'sleep profile' for
each user, detailing their primary sleep concern, goals, and barriers. To simulate conversations, each
user is instantiated as an LLM whose prompt contains the user's entire backstory vignette, along with
the full preceding conversation history, ensuring that the dialogue is consistently grounded in the
user's profile. For the offline learning phase, we generate  = 15 specialized preference datasets, each

                                                                                                                                                                               23
                                         Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

corresponding to one of the five personality dimensions. To create each dataset, we first generate
1, 000 pairs of 10-turn conversations by having our synthetic users interact with the coaching agent--a
'Talker' and 'Reasoner' system powered by Gemini 1.5 Pro. The key step for creating specific data
is via persona-based ranking: each of the 1, 000 conversation pairs is ranked by a reward function
that specifically embodies one of the five target personalities. For the online adaptation phase, we
evaluate the algorithm's performance on a test set of 512 samples for each of 5 distinct "users,"
who are simulated by a auto-rater system with generative feedback. This system employs Gemini
1.5 Flash to score conversations by systematically evaluating them against a detailed set of rubrics
designed to holistically assess sleep-coaching quality. These rubrics cover the agent's tone and style
(friendliness, supportiveness, empowerment), its ability to understand the user (rapport establishment,
capturing concerns, efficient information gathering), and the efficacy of its personalized intervention
(collaborative goal-setting, relevance, and quality of the structured plan).
B.2. Model and Training Details
B.3. Additional Results

Figure 4 | Test-time Training Performance of Different Methods using the Gemma3 1B model: Explicit &
Implicit Spectral Souping (SS-Exp & SS-Imp), P-SOUPS, PAD, PAD-SF, RLHF, adapted to 5 various users
in the UltraFeedback, T2I Generation, Sleep Coaching domains. The SS methods (especially SS-Exp)
consistently and outperform P-SOUPS and the PAD baselines, demonstrating superior performance in
online adaptation.

                                                                                                                                                                               24
                Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

Figure 5 | Evaluation Performance of Different Online Adaptation Methods using the Gemma3 1B
model: Explicit & Implicit Spectral Souping (SS-Exp & SS-Imp), P-SOUPS, PAD, PAD-SF, RLHF,
across adapted to 5 various users in the UltraFeedback, T2I Generation, Sleep Coaching domains.
The superior performance of the SS methods (over P-SOUPS, PAD, and PAD-SF baselines) is also
generalizable to online evaluations.

C. Sequential Estimation of 

The loss functions in both cases (binary labels and preference labels) are convex in , and so inference
of these parameters is tractable using off-the-shelf convex optimization methods. However evaluation
of the loss function is relatively expensive and must be performed for each user, ideally in real-time.
Thus, in this section we propose an online method optimization of . The formulation of our method
is based on sequential variational inference, but we will show the resulting inference algorithm is a
simple weighted least squares update.

    Our variational method aims to compute a variational posterior () via

                   (         )  =  arg min () [L (; B)]   +  KL (  (  )  |   (  ) ) .                (19)

                

We fix () = N (¯, ), and a Gaussian prior (). Note that this objective is convex in the parameters
of the variational posterior. In the case where we sequentially observe trajectories and labels at
interaction , (, ), we propose a sequential method for identification of  based on variational
continual learning. In particular, at time index , we compute variational posterior  via

                 () = arg min () [L (; (, ))] + KL(() | -1 ()).                                      (20)

                                     

Briefly, this method aims to sequentially infer the variational posterior by regularizing to the posterior
of the previous timestep, using a method similar to sequential filtering.

We derive the least squares update for the preference learning case, and the binary classification

model is a straightforward extension. We approximate (20) via second order Taylor expansion,

allowing exact  computation  of the expectation.  We will define  -1        =  -1 () --1 ()  (where  each
                                                                                          

 term here is vectorized over ). This term is computed by the log likelihoods of the policy as in

Section ??. We further define -1 = (¯-1-1), the predictive preference likelihood after updating
at step  - 1.

Computing the analytical minimum of this second order approximation, we get updates

                                -1  =  --11  +  -1 (1  -  -1 ) -1 -1                                 (21)
                                                                                                     (22)
                                  

                                   ¯ = ¯-1 + (1 - -1)-1

                                                                                                     25
                             Spectral Souping: A Unified Framework for Online Preference Alignment

which are inexpensive to compute compared to the cost of the model evaluation. The updates may be

made cheaper by exploiting rank-1 updates, but this is a relatively minor consideration. This update

can naively be performed once per timestep/user feedback, corresponding to a Newton-style step per

interaction. It can also be performed multiple times (matching iteratively reweighted least squares)

by  setting  -1  =    (  ¯   -1).

                           

                                                                                                    26
