arXiv:2401.03048v3 [cs.CV] 1 May 2025

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (03/2025)
Latte: Latent Diffusion Transformer for Video Generation
Xin Ma1, Yaohui Wang2, Xinyuan Chen2, Gengyu Jia3, Ziwei Liu4, Yuan-Fang Li1, Cunjian Chen1 Yu Qiao2 1Department of Data Science & AI, Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University 2Shanghai AI Laboratory 3Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications 4S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
Reviewed on OpenReview: https://openreview.net/forum?id=ntGPYNUF3t
Abstract
We propose Latte, a novel Latent Diffusion Transformer for video generation. Latte first extracts spatio-temporal tokens from input videos and then adopts a series of Transformer blocks to model video distribution in the latent space. In order to model a substantial number of tokens extracted from videos, four efficient variants are introduced from the perspective of decomposing the spatial and temporal dimensions of input videos. To improve the quality of generated videos, we determine the best practices of Latte through rigorous experimental analysis, including video clip patch embedding, model variants, timestep-class information injection, temporal positional embedding, and learning strategies. Our comprehensive evaluation demonstrates that Latte achieves state-of-the-art performance across four standard video generation datasets, i.e., FaceForensics, SkyTimelapse, UCF101, and Taichi-HD. In addition, we extend Latte to the text-to-video generation (T2V) task, where Latte achieves results that are competitive with recent T2V models. We strongly believe that Latte provides valuable insights for future research on incorporating Transformers into diffusion models for video generation. The project page is available at https://maxin-cn.github.io/latte_project/.
1 Introduction
Diffusion models Ho et al. (2020); Song et al. (2021b;a) are powerful deep generative models for many tasks in content creation, including image-to-image generation Meng et al. (2022); Zhao et al. (2022); Saharia et al. (2022a); Parmar et al. (2023), text-to-image generation Zhou et al. (2023); Rombach et al. (2022); Zhou et al. (2022); Ruiz et al. (2023); Zhang et al. (2023), and 3D object generation Wang et al. (2023); Chen et al. (2023); Zhou et al. (2021); Shue et al. (2023). Compared to these successful applications in images, generating high-quality videos still faces significant challenges, which can be primarily attributed to the intricate and high-dimensional nature of videos that encompass complex spatio-temporal information within high-resolution frames. The significant role backbone models play in the success of diffusion models has also been investigated Nichol & Dhariwal (2021); Peebles & Xie (2023); Bao et al. (2023). The U-Net Ronneberger et al. (2015), which relies on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), has held a prominent position in image and video generation works Ho et al. (2022); Dhariwal & Nichol (2021). In comparison, DiT Peebles & Xie (2023) and U-ViT Bao et al. (2023) adopt the architecture of ViT Dosovitskiy et al. (2021) in diffusion models for image generation and achieve great performance. Moreover, DiT has demonstrated that the inductive bias of U-Net is not crucial for the performance of latent diffusion models. On the other hand, attentionbased architectures Vaswani et al. (2017) present an intuitive option for capturing long-range contextual relationships in videos. Therefore, a very natural question arises: Can Transformer-based latent diffusion models enhance the generation of realistic videos?
 Corresponding author & Project lead.  Intern at Shanghai AI Lab.
1

Published in Transactions on Machine Learning Research (03/2025)
Figure 1: Sample videos with a resolution of 512 × 512. Latte can generate photorealistic videos with temporal coherent content. Please click the image to play the video clip via Acrobat Reader.
In this paper, we propose Latte, the novel latent diffusion Transformers for video generation, which adopts a video Transformer as the backbone. Latte employs a pre-trained variational autoencoder to encode input videos into features in the latent space, where tokens are extracted from encoded features. Thus, a series of transformer blocks is applied to encode these tokens. Considering the inherent disparities between spatial and temporal information and a large number of tokens extracted from input videos, as shown in Fig. 2, we design four efficient Transformer-based model variants from the perspective of disentangling the spatial and temporal dimensions of input videos. We also give more insights about the impact of the degree of decoupling between the temporal and spatial modules within the different models, which are lacking in previous works Lu et al. (2024); Gupta et al. (2024). Many best practices for convolutional models have been proposed, including text representation for question classification Pota et al. (2020), and network architecture design for image classification He et al. (2016), etc. Nevertheless, Transformer-based latent diffusion models for video generation might demonstrate different characteristics, necessitating the identification of optimal design choices for this architecture. Therefore, we conduct a comprehensive ablation analysis, encompassing video clip patch embedding, model variants, timestep-class information injection, temporal positional embedding, and learning strategies. Our analysis identifies best practices that enable Latte to generate photorealistic videos with temporal coherent content (see Fig. 1) and achieve state-of-the-art performance across four standard video generation benchmarks, including FaceForensics Rössler et al. (2018), SkyTimelapse Xiong et al. (2018), UCF101 Soomro et al. (2012) and Taichi-HD Siarohin et al. (2019) in terms of Fréchet Video Distance (FVD) Unterthiner et al. (2018), Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) Parmar et al. (2021), and Inception Score (IS). In addition, we extend Latte to text-to-video generation tasks, which also achieve competitive results compared to current T2V models. Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
· We present Latte, a novel latent diffusion Transformer, which adopts a video Transformer as the backbone. In addition, four model variants are introduced to efficiently capture spatio-temporal distribution in videos. The design insights of four model variants are also analyzed in Sec. 4.2.
· To improve the quality of generated videos, we comprehensively explore design alternatives, including video clip patch embedding, model variants, timestep-class information injection, temporal positional
2

