Photo-Realistic Single Image Super-Resolution Using a Generative Adversarial Network

arXiv:1609.04802v5 [cs.CV] 25 May 2017

Christian Ledig, Lucas Theis, Ferenc Husza´r, Jose Caballero, Andrew Cunningham, Alejandro Acosta, Andrew Aitken, Alykhan Tejani, Johannes Totz, Zehan Wang, Wenzhe Shi
Twitter
{cledig,ltheis,fhuszar,jcaballero,aacostadiaz,aaitken,atejani,jtotz,zehanw,wshi}@twitter.com

Abstract
Despite the breakthroughs in accuracy and speed of single image super-resolution using faster and deeper convolutional neural networks, one central problem remains largely unsolved: how do we recover the finer texture details when we super-resolve at large upscaling factors? The behavior of optimization-based super-resolution methods is principally driven by the choice of the objective function. Recent work has largely focused on minimizing the mean squared reconstruction error. The resulting estimates have high peak signal-to-noise ratios, but they are often lacking high-frequency details and are perceptually unsatisfying in the sense that they fail to match the fidelity expected at the higher resolution. In this paper, we present SRGAN, a generative adversarial network (GAN) for image superresolution (SR). To our knowledge, it is the first framework capable of inferring photo-realistic natural images for 4× upscaling factors. To achieve this, we propose a perceptual loss function which consists of an adversarial loss and a content loss. The adversarial loss pushes our solution to the natural image manifold using a discriminator network that is trained to differentiate between the super-resolved images and original photo-realistic images. In addition, we use a content loss motivated by perceptual similarity instead of similarity in pixel space. Our deep residual network is able to recover photo-realistic textures from heavily downsampled images on public benchmarks. An extensive mean-opinion-score (MOS) test shows hugely significant gains in perceptual quality using SRGAN. The MOS scores obtained with SRGAN are closer to those of the original high-resolution images than to those obtained with any state-of-the-art method.

1. Introduction

The highly challenging task of estimating a highresolution (HR) image from its low-resolution (LR) counterpart is referred to as super-resolution (SR). SR received substantial attention from within the computer vision research community and has a wide range of applications [63, 71, 43].

4× SRGAN (proposed)

original

Figure 1: Super-resolved image (left) is almost indistinguishable from original (right). [4× upscaling]
The ill-posed nature of the underdetermined SR problem is particularly pronounced for high upscaling factors, for which texture detail in the reconstructed SR images is typically absent. The optimization target of supervised SR algorithms is commonly the minimization of the mean squared error (MSE) between the recovered HR image and the ground truth. This is convenient as minimizing MSE also maximizes the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), which is a common measure used to evaluate and compare SR algorithms [61]. However, the ability of MSE (and PSNR) to capture perceptually relevant differences, such as high texture detail, is very limited as they are defined based on pixel-wise image differences [60, 58, 26]. This is illustrated in Figure 2, where highest PSNR does not necessarily reflect the perceptually better SR result. The

1

bicubic (21.59dB/0.6423)

SRResNet (23.53dB/0.7832)

SRGAN (21.15dB/0.6868)

original

Figure 2: From left to right: bicubic interpolation, deep residual network optimized for MSE, deep residual generative adversarial network optimized for a loss more sensitive to human perception, original HR image. Corresponding PSNR and SSIM are shown in brackets. [4× upscaling]

perceptual difference between the super-resolved and original image means that the recovered image is not photorealistic as defined by Ferwerda [16].
In this work we propose a super-resolution generative adversarial network (SRGAN) for which we employ a deep residual network (ResNet) with skip-connection and diverge from MSE as the sole optimization target. Different from previous works, we define a novel perceptual loss using high-level feature maps of the VGG network [49, 33, 5] combined with a discriminator that encourages solutions perceptually hard to distinguish from the HR reference images. An example photo-realistic image that was superresolved with a 4× upscaling factor is shown in Figure 1.
1.1. Related work
1.1.1 Image super-resolution
Recent overview articles on image SR include Nasrollahi and Moeslund [43] or Yang et al. [61]. Here we will focus on single image super-resolution (SISR) and will not further discuss approaches that recover HR images from multiple images [4, 15].
Prediction-based methods were among the first methods to tackle SISR. While these filtering approaches, e.g. linear, bicubic or Lanczos [14] filtering, can be very fast, they oversimplify the SISR problem and usually yield solutions with overly smooth textures. Methods that put particularly focus on edge-preservation have been proposed [1, 39].
More powerful approaches aim to establish a complex mapping between low- and high-resolution image information and usually rely on training data. Many methods that are based on example-pairs rely on LR training patches for

which the corresponding HR counterparts are known. Early work was presented by Freeman et al. [18, 17]. Related approaches to the SR problem originate in compressed sensing [62, 12, 69]. In Glasner et al. [21] the authors exploit patch redundancies across scales within the image to drive the SR. This paradigm of self-similarity is also employed in Huang et al. [31], where self dictionaries are extended by further allowing for small transformations and shape variations. Gu et al. [25] proposed a convolutional sparse coding approach that improves consistency by processing the whole image rather than overlapping patches.
To reconstruct realistic texture detail while avoiding edge artifacts, Tai et al. [52] combine an edge-directed SR algorithm based on a gradient profile prior [50] with the benefits of learning-based detail synthesis. Zhang et al. [70] propose a multi-scale dictionary to capture redundancies of similar image patches at different scales. To super-resolve landmark images, Yue et al. [67] retrieve correlating HR images with similar content from the web and propose a structure-aware matching criterion for alignment.
Neighborhood embedding approaches upsample a LR image patch by finding similar LR training patches in a low dimensional manifold and combining their corresponding HR patches for reconstruction [54, 55]. In Kim and Kwon [35] the authors emphasize the tendency of neighborhood approaches to overfit and formulate a more general map of example pairs using kernel ridge regression. The regression problem can also be solved with Gaussian process regression [27], trees [46] or Random Forests [47]. In Dai et al. [6] a multitude of patch-specific regressors is learned and the most appropriate regressors selected during testing.
Recently convolutional neural network (CNN) based SR

