arXiv:2301.00704v1 [cs.CV] 2 Jan 2023

Muse: Text-To-Image Generation via Masked Generative Transformers
Huiwen Chang * Han Zhang * Jarred Barber  AJ Maschinot  Jose´ Lezama Lu Jiang Ming-Hsuan Yang Kevin Murphy William T. Freeman Michael Rubinstein  Yuanzhen Li  Dilip Krishnan 
Google Research
Abstract
We present Muse, a text-to-image Transformer model that achieves state-of-the-art image generation performance while being significantly more efficient than diffusion or autoregressive models. Muse is trained on a masked modeling task in discrete token space: given the text embedding extracted from a pre-trained large language model (LLM), Muse is trained to predict randomly masked image tokens. Compared to pixel-space diffusion models, such as Imagen and DALL-E 2, Muse is significantly more efficient due to the use of discrete tokens and requiring fewer sampling iterations; compared to autoregressive models, such as Parti, Muse is more efficient due to the use of parallel decoding. The use of a pre-trained LLM enables fine-grained language understanding, translating to high-fidelity image generation and the understanding of visual concepts such as objects, their spatial relationships, pose, cardinality etc. Our 900M parameter model achieves a new SOTA on CC3M, with an FID score of 6.06. The Muse 3B parameter model achieves an FID of 7.88 on zero-shot COCO evaluation, along with a CLIP score of 0.32. Muse also directly enables a number of image editing applications without the need to fine-tune or invert the model: inpainting, outpainting, and mask-free editing. More results are available at http://muse-model.github.io.
1. Introduction
Generative image models conditioned on text prompts have taken an enormous leap in quality and flexibility in the last few years (Ramesh et al., 2022; Nichol et al., 2021; Saharia et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Midjourney, 2022). This was enabled by a combination of deep learning architecture innovations (Van Den Oord et al., 2017; Vaswani et al., 2017); novel training paradigms such as masked modeling for both language (Devlin et al., 2018; Raffel et al., 2020) and vision tasks (He et al., 2022; Chang et al., 2022); new families of generative models such as diffusion (Ho et al., 2020; Rombach et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022) and masking-based generation (Chang et al., 2022); and finally, the availability of large scale image-text paired datasets (Schuhmann et al., 2021).
In this work, we present a new model for text-to-image synthesis using a masked image modeling approach (Chang et al., 2022). Our image decoder architecture is conditioned on embeddings from a pre-trained and frozen T5-XXL (Raffel et al., 2020) large language model (LLM) encoder. In agreement with Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022), we find that conditioning on a pre-trained LLM is crucial for photorealistic, high quality image generation. Our models (except for the VQGAN quantizer) are built on the Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) architecture.
We have trained a sequence of Muse models, ranging in size from 632M parameters to 3B parameters (for the image decoder; the T5-XXL model has an additional 4.6B parameters). Each model consists of several sub-models (Figure 3): First, we have a pair of VQGAN "tokenizer" models (Esser et al., 2021b), which can encode an input image to a sequence of discrete tokens as well as decode a token sequence back to an image. We use two VQGANs, one for 256x256 resolution ("low-res") and another for 512x512 resolution ("high-res"). Second, we have a base masked image model, which contains the bulk of our parameters. This model takes a sequence of partially masked low-res tokens and predicts the marginal distribution
*Equal contribution Core contribution. Correspondence to: Huiwen Chang <huiwenchang@google.com>, Han Zhang <zhanghan@google.com>, Dilip Krishnan <dilipkay@google.com>.
1

A storefront with 'Apollo' written on it, in front of Matterhorn Zermatt.

A fluffy baby sloth with a knitted hat trying to figure out a laptop, close up.

A sheep in a wine glass.

A futuristic city with flying cars.

A large array of colorful cupcakes, arranged on a maple table to spell MUSE.

Manhattan skyline made of bread.

Astronauts kicking a football in front of Eiffel tower.

Two cats doing research.

3D mesh of Titanic floating on a water lily pond in the style of Monet.

A storefront with 'Muse' A surreal painting of a written on it, in front robot making coffee. of Matterhorn Zermatt.

A cake made of macarons in a unicorn shape.

Three dogs celebrating Christmas with some champagne.

Figure 1. Muse text-to-image generation (512 × 512 resolution). Under each generated image, the corresponding caption is shown, exhibiting a variety of styles, captions and understanding. Each image was generated in 1.3s on a TPUv4 chip.

for each masked token, conditioned on the unmasked tokens and a T5XXL text embedding. Third, we have a "superres" transformer model which translates (unmasked) low-res tokens into high-res tokens, again conditioned on T5-XXL text embeddings. We explain our pipeline in detail in Section 2.
Compared to Imagen (Saharia et al., 2022) or Dall-E2 (Ramesh et al., 2022) which are built on cascaded pixel-space diffusion models, Muse is significantly more efficient due to the use of discrete tokens; it can be thought of as a discrete diffusion process with the absorbing state ([MASK]) (Austin et al., 2021). Compared to Parti (Yu et al., 2022), a state-of-the-art autoregressive model, Muse is more efficient due to the use of parallel decoding. Based on comparisons on similar hardware (TPU-v4 chips), we estimate that Muse is more than 10x faster at inference time than either Imagen-3B or Parti-3B models and 3x faster than Stable Diffusion v1.4 (Rombach et al., 2022) (see Section 3.2.2). All these comparisons are when images of the same size: either 256 × 256 or 512 × 512. Muse is also faster than Stable Diffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), in spite of both models working in the latent space of a VQGAN. We believe that this is due to the use of a diffusion model in Stable
2

