MAKE-A-VIDEO: TEXT-TO-VIDEO GENERATION WITHOUT TEXT-VIDEO DATA

Uriel Singer +

Adam Polyak +

Thomas Hayes +

Xi Yin +

Jie An Songyang Zhang Qiyuan Hu Harry Yang Oron Ashual Oran Gafni

Devi Parikh +

Sonal Gupta +

Yaniv Taigman +

Meta AI

arXiv:2209.14792v1 [cs.CV] 29 Sep 2022

ABSTRACT
We propose Make-A-Video ­ an approach for directly translating the tremendous recent progress in Text-to-Image (T2I) generation to Text-to-Video (T2V). Our intuition is simple: learn what the world looks like and how it is described from paired text-image data, and learn how the world moves from unsupervised video footage. Make-A-Video has three advantages: (1) it accelerates training of the T2V model (it does not need to learn visual and multimodal representations from scratch), (2) it does not require paired text-video data, and (3) the generated videos inherit the vastness (diversity in aesthetic, fantastical depictions, etc.) of today's image generation models. We design a simple yet effective way to build on T2I models with novel and effective spatial-temporal modules. First, we decompose the full temporal U-Net and attention tensors and approximate them in space and time. Second, we design a spatial temporal pipeline to generate high resolution and frame rate videos with a video decoder, interpolation model and two super resolution models that can enable various applications besides T2V. In all aspects, spatial and temporal resolution, faithfulness to text, and quality, Make-A-Video sets the new state-of-the-art in text-to-video generation, as determined by both qualitative and quantitative measures.
1 INTRODUCTION
The Internet has fueled collecting billions of (alt-text, image) pairs from HTML pages (Schuhmann et al., 2022), enabling the recent breakthroughs in Text-to-Image (T2I) modeling. However, replicating this success for videos is limited since a similarly sized (text, video) dataset cannot be easily collected. It would be wasteful to train Text-to-Video (T2V) models from scratch when there already exist models that can generate images. Moreover, unsupervised learning enables networks to learn from orders of magnitude more data. This large quantity of data is important to learn representations of more subtle, less common concepts in the world. Unsupervised learning has long had great success in advancing the field of natural language processing (NLP) (Liu et al., 2019a; Brown et al., 2020). Models pre-trained this way yield considerably higher performance than when solely trained in a supervised manner.
Inspired by these motivations, we propose Make-A-Video. Make-A-Video leverages T2I models to learn the correspondence between text and the visual world, and uses unsupervised learning on unlabeled (unpaired) video data, to learn realistic motion. Together, Make-A-Video generates videos from text without leveraging paired text-video data.
Clearly, text describing images does not capture the entirety of phenomena observed in videos. That said, one can often infer actions and events from static images (e.g. a woman drinking coffee, or an
+ Core Contributors. Corresponding author: urielsinger@meta.com. Jie and Songyang are from University of Rochester (work done during internship at Meta).
1

(a) A dog wearing a superhero outfit with red cape flying through the sky.
(b) There is a table by a window with sunlight streaming through illuminating a pile of books.
(c) Robot dancing in times square.
(d) Unicorns running along a beach, highly detailed.
Figure 1: T2V generation examples. Our model can generate high-quality videos with coherent motion for a diverse set of visual concepts. In example (a), there are large and realistic motion for the dog. In example (b), the books are almost static but the scene changes with the camera motion. Video samples are available at make-a-video.github.io
elephant kicking a football) as done in image-based action recognition systems (Girish et al., 2020). Moreover, even without text descriptions, unsupervised videos are sufficient to learn how different entities in the world move and interact (e.g. the motion of waves at the beach, or of an elephant's trunk). As a result, a model that has only seen text describing images is surprisingly effective at generating short videos, as demonstrated by our temporal diffusion-based method. Make-A-Video sets the new state-of-the-art in T2V generation. Using function-preserving transformations, we extend the spatial layers at the model initialization stage, to include temporal information. The extended spatial-temporal network includes new attention modules that learn temporal world dynamics from a collection of videos. This procedure significantly accelerates the T2V training process by instantaneously transferring the knowledge from a previously trained T2I network to a new T2V one. To enhance the visual quality, we train spatial super-resolution models as well as frame interpolation models. This increases the resolution of the generated videos, as well as enables a higher (controllable) frame rate. Our main contributions are:
· We present Make-A-Video ­ an effective method that extends a diffusion-based T2I model to T2V through a spatiotemporally factorized diffusion model.
· We leverage joint text-image priors to bypass the need for paired text-video data, which in turn allows us to potentially scale to larger quantities of video data.
· We present super-resolution strategies in space and time that, for the first time, generate high-definition, high frame-rate videos given a user-provided textual input.
· We evaluate Make-A-Video against existing T2V systems and present: (a) State-of-the-art results in quantitative as well as qualitative measures, and (b) A more thorough evaluation than existing literature in T2V. We also collect a test set of 300 prompts for zero-shot T2V human evaluation which we plan to release.
2

