Noise2Music: Text-conditioned Music Generation with Diffusion Models

arXiv:2302.03917v2 [cs.SD] 6 Mar 2023

Qingqing Huang * 1 Daniel S. Park * 1 Tao Wang  1 Timo I. Denk  1 Andy Ly  1 Nanxin Chen  1 Zhengdong Zhang 1 Zhishuai Zhang 1 Jiahui Yu 1 Christian Frank 1 Jesse Engel 1 Quoc V. Le 1
William Chan 2 Zhifeng Chen 2 Wei Han  1

Abstract
We introduce Noise2Music, where a series of diffusion models is trained to generate high-quality 30-second music clips from text prompts. Two types of diffusion models, a generator model, which generates an intermediate representation conditioned on text, and a cascader model, which generates high-fidelity audio conditioned on the intermediate representation and possibly the text, are trained and utilized in succession to generate high-fidelity music. We explore two options for the intermediate representation, one using a spectrogram and the other using audio with lower fidelity. We find that the generated audio is not only able to faithfully reflect key elements of the text prompt such as genre, tempo, instruments, mood, and era, but goes beyond to ground finegrained semantics of the prompt. Pretrained large language models play a key role in this story-- they are used to generate paired text for the audio of the training set and to extract embeddings of the text prompts ingested by the diffusion models.
Generated examples:
https://google-research.github.io/noise2music
1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have been shown to have remarkable generative ability. In this work, we explore the generative capability of deep models for audio.
We introduce Noise2Music, a diffusion-based (SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020) method of generating music from text prompts and demonstrate its capability by generating 30-second long 24kHz music clips.
Modeling: We train a series of cascading diffusion models
*Equal contribution Core contributors 1Google Research 2Work done while at Google. Correspondence to: Qingqing Huang <qqhuang@google.com>.
Preprint.

(Ho et al., 2022b), where the first model learns the generative task of producing a compressed representation of a 30second waveform from a text prompt, and the second model learns to generate a 16kHz waveform conditioned on the compressed representation and optionally the text prompt. We have investigated two options for the intermediate representation: a log-mel spectrogram, or a 3.2kHz waveform. 1D U-Nets are used for learning the noise vectors for the diffusion model. The diffusion models are conditioned on user prompts in the format of free-form text, which are encoded by a pre-trained language model (LM) and ingested by the 1D U-Net layers via cross attention. A final superresolution cascader is used to generate the 24kHz audio from the 16kHz waveform.
Data mining: A large amount of training data is crucial for producing high-quality samples from a deep generative model. We employ a data mining pipeline to construct a large-scale training dataset of diverse music audio clips, each paired with multiple descriptive text labels. The text labels for the audio are generated by employing a pair of pretrained deep models: first, we use a large language model to generate a large set of generic music descriptive sentences as caption candidates; we then use a pre-trained music-text joint embedding model to score each unlabeled music clip against all the caption candidates and select the captions with the highest similarity score as pseudo labels for the audio clip. We are able to annotate O(150K) hours of audio sources this way to constitute our training data.
MuLaMCap: As a by-product of this work, we introduce MuLan-LaMDA Music Caption dataset (MuLaMCap), consisting of O(400K) music-text pairs obtained by annotating the music content from AudioSet by the process described above. Compared to the original AudioSet ontology, where 141 out of 632 label classes are music related, the captions in MuLaMCap come from a large vocabulary consisting of 4 million music descriptive sentences and phrases, which have a much higher degree of diversity and granularity. We expect this dataset to be utilized for applications beyond sound classification, e.g., music captioning, retrieval or generation.
Evaluation: We measure the quality of our text conditioned music generation model with two metrics: the Fre´chet Audio Distance (FAD) (Kilgour et al., 2018) which measures how

Noise2Music

the quality of generated audio clips compare to that of two benchmark datasets, e.g. the music split of AudioSet (Gemmeke et al., 2017) and MagnaTagATune (Law et al., 2009); and the MuLan similarity score (Huang et al., 2022) which measures the semantic alignment between text prompts and the corresponding generated audio clips.
Generative ability: Our models demonstrate that they can go beyond simple music attribute conditioning, e.g., genre, instrument, era, and are able to handle complex and fine-grained semantics which can reflect soft attributes such as atmosphere, feeling or activity. This is achieved by constructing a training dataset that not only relies on the metadata tags, but that also leverages the pretrained music-text joint embedding model to ground the semantics to audio features. Cherry-picked examples of music generated from text prompts can be found in google-research.github.io/noise2music#table-1 and googleresearch.github.io/noise2music#table-4.
2. Related Work
Generative models: Deep generative models have a long and successful history in a wide range of domains. More recently, a significant amount of effort has been focused toward scaling up the dataset size for training models that can produce extremely high quality samples. Here we compile an incomplete list of such recent developments in text (Brown et al., 2020; Thoppilan et al., 2022), speech (Wang et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2021; Borsos et al., 2022), images (Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022b; Yu et al., 2022), and audio (Briot, 2021; Dhariwal et al., 2020; MubertAI, 2022; Kreuk et al., 2022).
Diffusion models: Diffusion models, introduced in (SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020) have shown the capability to generate high quality images (Ho et al., 2020; 2022b), audio (Yang et al., 2022; Popov et al., 2021) and video (Ho et al., 2022c;a). Cascaded diffusion models (Ho et al., 2022b; Saharia et al., 2022b), which uses a series of diffusion models to generate a lowfidelity image and refine the image in succession to produce a high-fidelity image, has been adapted to audio in this work.
Audio generation: Various methods have been employed to generate audio conditioned on external input. Some relevant examples are provided in the context of the text-toaudio task, in which text-conditioned spectrogram generation and spectrogram-conditioned audio has been intensively studied (Popov et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2021; Kong et al., 2021; Wu & Shi, 2021; Chen et al., 2022). Restricting our attention to audio generation based on descriptive text, text conditioned general sound event generation has been approached with auto-regressive methods by AudioGen (Kreuk et al., 2022) as well as diffusion-based methods

that operate on discrete audio codes by DiffSound (Yang et al., 2022). If we narrow our scope to music generation, Jukebox (Dhariwal et al., 2020), Mubert (MubertAI, 2022), and MusicLM (Agostinelli et al., 2023) have taken an autoregressive approach, while Riffusion (Forsgren & Martiros, 2022) employed diffusion for spectrogram generation.
Conditional signals in audio generation: Broadly speaking, two approaches have been taken on how the conditional signal, which steers the model to generate a specific style of music, is parameterized and communicated to an audio generation model. One approach is to project the signal to a pre-defined, interpretable embedding space-- Jukebox (Dhariwal et al., 2020) relies on a fixed vocabulary of artists and genres mined from the training data to condition the decoder, while Mubert (MubertAI, 2022) matches the user prompt to a set of tags in a predefined vocabulary. The other, taken by works such as AudioGen (Kreuk et al., 2022) and MusicLM (Agostinelli et al., 2023) is to use a pre-trained text encoder to encode arbitrary user prompts.
Authors' Note: During the completion of this work, concurrent research which has overlap with this work has appeared (Schneider et al., 2023).

3. Methods

3.1. Diffusion models

Diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020) are powerful generative models that generate a sample by iteratively denoising random noise. Here we review the minimal amount of information on diffusion models required for understanding our work. More details can be found in the supplementary material.

The input to a diffusion model, which we consider to be a generative model of some sample space, is the conditioning signal c, a randomly sampled time step t and a sample xt obtained by corrupting the original sample x via a Gaussian diffusion process with a noise schedule parameterized by the standard deviation t of the noise at time t. The range of time t is set to be [0, 1], from which it is uniformly sampled during training, and the diffusion is viewed to progress in the direction of increasing time. The dynamics of Gaussian diffusion are well understood--the distribution of xt is completely parameterized by a single noise vector that belongs to a standard normal distribution, as xt maybe written as a function of the original sample, the deterministic noise schedule, and the noise vector , i.e., xt(x, , ), where it should be understood that  is used to denote the entire noise schedule. The model  is trained to identify the noise vector given this input. The diffusion loss can be written as

Ex,c, ,t wt (xt, c, t) - 2 ,

(1)

where wt is a fixed weight function of choice.

