arXiv:2605.06070v1 [cs.CV] 7 May 2026

Arena as Offline Reward: Efficient Fine-Grained Preference Optimization for Diffusion Models
Zhikai Li1 , Yue Zhao2 , Edward Zhongwei Zhang2 , Xuewen Liu1 , Jing Zhang1 , Qingyi Gu1 , Zhen Dong3
1Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2University of California, Berkeley 3University of California, Santa Barbara
Abstract
Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) effectively promotes preference alignment of text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models. To improve computational efficiency, direct preference optimization (DPO), which avoids explicit reward modeling, has been widely studied. However, its reliance on binary feedback limits it to coarse-grained modeling on chosen­rejected pairs, resulting in suboptimal optimization. In this paper, we propose ArenaPO, which leverages Arena scores as offline rewards to provide refined feedback, thus achieving efficient and fine-grained optimization without a reward model. This enables ArenaPO to benefit from both the rich rewards of traditional RLHF and the efficiency of DPO. Specifically, we first construct a model Arena in which each model's capability is represented as a Gaussian distribution, and infer these capabilities by traversing the annotated pairwise preferences. Each output image is treated as a sample from the corresponding capability distribution. Then, for a image pair, conditioned on the two capability distributions and the observed pairwise preference, the absolute quality gap is estimated using latent-variable inference based on truncated normal distribution, which serves as fine-grained feedback during training. It does not require a reward model and can be computed offline, thus introducing no additional training overhead. We conduct ArenaPO training on Pick-a-Pic v2 and HPD v3 datasets, showing that ArenaPO consistently outperforms existing baselines.
1 Introduction
Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models, such as DALLE [2], Stable Diffusion [27, 24], FLUX [3], and PixArt [6], have demonstrated strong capabilities in generating high-quality and highly realistic images [39]. Although large-scale pretraining endows these models with powerful generative abilities, post-training optimization is typically required to better align them with human preferences for real-world applications [35, 38]. Consequently, in recent years, preference alignment approaches that incorporate human feedback into the diffusion training have been widely investigated.
One notable alignment paradigm is reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF) [7, 33]. However, its efficiency has been widely criticized, largely because the reward model requires substantial resources for training and its deployment necessitates online inference. Therefore, most works on diffusion model alignment focus on direct preference optimization (DPO) [35, 17, 11, 42], a more efficient paradigm that directly leverages static offline datasets and does not require explicit reward modeling. Despite its high efficiency, DPO is limited to binary rewards on chosen­rejected image pairs, unlike the rich reward signals used in traditional RLHF, as illustrated in Figure 1. In practice, however, the quality differences between image pairs vary substantially [19], thus this coarse-grained reward modeling and optimization can potentially lead to suboptimal results.
Co-second authors. Corresponding author.

In this work, we aim to explore how fine-

Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)

grained preference can be incorporated into DPO in an offline manner without relying on an

> yw

y

Rich reward Inefficiency

explicit reward model. Following Thurstone's Case V theory [34], we model each model's Preference data Reward model

Policy model

capability as a Gaussian distribution character-

Direct Preference Optimization (DPO)

ized by a mean and uncertainty, rather than a fixed point, and regard a specific output image as a sample drawn from this distribution. The labels in the dataset represent discretized binary

> yw

y

Preference data

Binary reward Efficiency

Policy model

relative preferences between the output images. Under this formulation, the difference between the model capability means serves as a prior of overall quality, while the binary preference acts as an observation induced by capability uncertainty. Consequently, the absolute quality gap between two output images can be estimated by a function with respect to the source models' capability means and uncertainties, as illustrated in Figure 2.

Arena as Offline Reward (ArenaPO, Ours)

> yw

y

Preference data

1

2 Rich reward

3 ...4

Efficiency

Model Arena

Policy model

Figure 1: Comparison of RLHF, DPO, and ArenaPO. The proposed ArenaPO extracts and leverages rich offline rewards from model Arena, without requiring a reward model, enabling both finegrained and efficient preference alignment.

With the above insight, we propose ArenaPO,

which leverages Arena information to provide Model capability

Output image

fine-grained preference in an offline manner.

One Sample

ArenaPO can benefit from both the rich reward

signals of traditional RLHF and the efficiency

Quality Gap

of DPO. Specifically, as in K-Sort Arena [19],

One Sample

we construct a model Arena and represent each

model's capability as a Gaussian distribution.

By traversing the entire dataset and performing Figure 2: Motivation of the proposed ArenaPO.

pairwise comparisons, we iteratively update Each output image can be viewed as one sam-

the capability distribution of each model. Then, ple drawn from the model's capability distribution for each image pair, given the corresponding N (µ, 2). Thus, for two output images, their qual-

capability distributions of the two models and ity gap can be modeled as a function with respect

the annotated binary preference, we introduce to their source models' µw - µl, w, and l.

a latent-variable inference procedure based on

truncated normal distribution to efficiently estimate the absolute quality difference between the two

images. This estimated difference serves as a fine-grained preference during training. Notably, the

entire pipeline does not rely on a reward model and can be computed fully offline, thereby incurring

no additional training overhead. An overview of the proposed method is illustrated in Figure 3.

Our main contributions are summarized as follows:

· We propose ArenaPO, which extracts fine-grained preference from model Arena and uses it as efficient feedback for DPO, thereby effectively improving alignment performance for T2I diffusion models. ArenaPO does not rely on a reward model and can be computed offline, thus delivering both accuracy and efficiency.
· We introduce a latent-variable inference method based on truncated normal distribution, which enables efficient estimation of the absolute quality difference between an image pair given the models' capability distributions and the annotated binary preference.
· ArenaPO training is conducted on Pick-a-Pic v2 and HPD v3 datasets, and the results across multiple T2I benchmarks demonstrate ArenaPO's superiority. For instance, with ArenaPO training, the win-rate reaches 79.0% compared to original Stable Diffusion 1.5.

2 Related Work
T2I Diffusion Models T2I diffusion models have become the dominant paradigm due to their strong generation quality [8, 27]. Recent works focus on improving model capacity and conditioning quality, including more powerful backbones [23, 30], stronger text encoders [6], and more detailed

2

