arXiv:2205.11487v1 [cs.CV] 23 May 2022

Photorealistic Text-to-Image Diffusion Models with Deep Language Understanding
Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kamyar Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S. Sara Mahdavi, Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J Fleet, Mohammad Norouzi
{sahariac,williamchan,mnorouzi}@google.com {srbs,lala,jwhang,jonathanho,davidfleet}@google.com
Google Research, Brain Team Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Abstract
We present Imagen, a text-to-image diffusion model with an unprecedented degree of photorealism and a deep level of language understanding. Imagen builds on the power of large transformer language models in understanding text and hinges on the strength of diffusion models in high-fidelity image generation. Our key discovery is that generic large language models (e.g. T5), pretrained on text-only corpora, are surprisingly effective at encoding text for image synthesis: increasing the size of the language model in Imagen boosts both sample fidelity and imagetext alignment much more than increasing the size of the image diffusion model. Imagen achieves a new state-of-the-art FID score of 7.27 on the COCO dataset, without ever training on COCO, and human raters find Imagen samples to be on par with the COCO data itself in image-text alignment. To assess text-to-image models in greater depth, we introduce DrawBench, a comprehensive and challenging benchmark for text-to-image models. With DrawBench, we compare Imagen with recent methods including VQ-GAN+CLIP, Latent Diffusion Models, GLIDE and DALL-E 2, and find that human raters prefer Imagen over other models in side-byside comparisons, both in terms of sample quality and image-text alignment. See imagen.research.google for an overview of the results.
1 Introduction
Multimodal learning has come into prominence recently, with text-to-image synthesis [53, 12, 57] and image-text contrastive learning [49, 31, 74] at the forefront. These models have transformed the research community and captured widespread public attention with creative image generation [22, 54] and editing applications [21, 41, 34]. To pursue this research direction further, we introduce Imagen, a text-to-image diffusion model that combines the power of transformer language models (LMs) [15, 52] with high-fidelity diffusion models [28, 29, 16, 41] to deliver an unprecedented degree of photorealism and a deep level of language understanding in text-to-image synthesis. In contrast to prior work that uses only image-text data for model training [e.g., 53, 41], the key finding behind Imagen is that text embeddings from large LMs [52, 15], pretrained on text-only corpora, are remarkably effective for text-to-image synthesis. See Fig. 1 for select samples.
Imagen comprises a frozen T5-XXL [52] encoder to map input text into a sequence of embeddings and a 64×64 image diffusion model, followed by two super-resolution diffusion models for generating
Equal contribution. Core contribution.

Sprouts in the shape of text `Imagen' coming out of a A photo of a Shiba Inu dog with a backpack riding a A high contrast portrait of a very happy fuzzy panda

fairytale book.

bike. It is wearing sunglasses and a beach hat.

dressed as a chef in a high end kitchen making dough.

There is a painting of flowers on the wall behind him.

Teddy bears swimming at the Olympics 400m Butter- A cute corgi lives in a house made out of sushi. A cute sloth holding a small treasure chest. A bright

fly event.

golden glow is coming from the chest.

A brain riding a rocketship heading towards the moon. A dragon fruit wearing karate belt in the snow. A strawberry mug filled with white sesame seeds. The mug is floating in a dark chocolate sea.
Figure 1: Select 1024 × 1024 Imagen samples for various text inputs. We only include photorealistic images in this figure and leave artistic content to the Appendix, since generating photorealistic images is more challenging from a technical point of view. Figs. A.1 to A.3 show more samples.
2

