arXiv:2105.05233v4 [cs.LG] 1 Jun 2021

Diffusion Models Beat GANs on Image Synthesis

Prafulla Dhariwal OpenAI
prafulla@openai.com

Alex Nichol OpenAI
alex@openai.com

Abstract
We show that diffusion models can achieve image sample quality superior to the current state-of-the-art generative models. We achieve this on unconditional image synthesis by finding a better architecture through a series of ablations. For conditional image synthesis, we further improve sample quality with classifier guidance: a simple, compute-efficient method for trading off diversity for fidelity using gradients from a classifier. We achieve an FID of 2.97 on ImageNet 128×128, 4.59 on ImageNet 256×256, and 7.72 on ImageNet 512×512, and we match BigGAN-deep even with as few as 25 forward passes per sample, all while maintaining better coverage of the distribution. Finally, we find that classifier guidance combines well with upsampling diffusion models, further improving FID to 3.94 on ImageNet 256×256 and 3.85 on ImageNet 512×512. We release our code at https://github.com/openai/guided-diffusion.
1 Introduction

Figure 1: Selected samples from our best ImageNet 512×512 model (FID 3.85)
Over the past few years, generative models have gained the ability to generate human-like natural language [6], infinite high-quality synthetic images [5, 28, 51] and highly diverse human speech and music [64, 13]. These models can be used in a variety of ways, such as generating images from text prompts [72, 50] or learning useful feature representations [14, 7]. While these models are already
Equal contribution

capable of producing realistic images and sound, there is still much room for improvement beyond the current state-of-the-art, and better generative models could have wide-ranging impacts on graphic design, games, music production, and countless other fields.
GANs [19] currently hold the state-of-the-art on most image generation tasks [5, 68, 28] as measured by sample quality metrics such as FID [23], Inception Score [54] and Precision [32]. However, some of these metrics do not fully capture diversity, and it has been shown that GANs capture less diversity than state-of-the-art likelihood-based models [51, 43, 42]. Furthermore, GANs are often difficult to train, collapsing without carefully selected hyperparameters and regularizers [5, 41, 4].
While GANs hold the state-of-the-art, their drawbacks make them difficult to scale and apply to new domains. As a result, much work has been done to achieve GAN-like sample quality with likelihood-based models [51, 25, 42, 9]. While these models capture more diversity and are typically easier to scale and train than GANs, they still fall short in terms of visual sample quality. Furthermore, except for VAEs, sampling from these models is slower than GANs in terms of wall-clock time.
Diffusion models are a class of likelihood-based models which have recently been shown to produce high-quality images [56, 59, 25] while offering desirable properties such as distribution coverage, a stationary training objective, and easy scalability. These models generate samples by gradually removing noise from a signal, and their training objective can be expressed as a reweighted variational lower-bound [25]. This class of models already holds the state-of-the-art [60] on CIFAR-10 [31], but still lags behind GANs on difficult generation datasets like LSUN and ImageNet. Nichol and Dhariwal [43] found that these models improve reliably with increased compute, and can produce high-quality samples even on the difficult ImageNet 256×256 dataset using an upsampling stack. However, the FID of this model is still not competitive with BigGAN-deep [5], the current state-of-the-art on this dataset.
We hypothesize that the gap between diffusion models and GANs stems from at least two factors: first, that the model architectures used by recent GAN literature have been heavily explored and refined; second, that GANs are able to trade off diversity for fidelity, producing high quality samples but not covering the whole distribution. We aim to bring these benefits to diffusion models, first by improving model architecture and then by devising a scheme for trading off diversity for fidelity. With these improvements, we achieve a new state-of-the-art, surpassing GANs on several different metrics and datasets.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we give a brief background of diffusion models based on Ho et al. [25] and the improvements from Nichol and Dhariwal [43] and Song et al. [57], and we describe our evaluation setup. In Section 3, we introduce simple architecture improvements that give a substantial boost to FID. In Section 4, we describe a method for using gradients from a classifier to guide a diffusion model during sampling. We find that a single hyperparameter, the scale of the classifier gradients, can be tuned to trade off diversity for fidelity, and we can increase this gradient scale factor by an order of magnitude without obtaining adversarial examples [61]. Finally, in Section 5 we show that models with our improved architecture achieve state-of-the-art on unconditional image synthesis tasks, and with classifier guidance achieve state-ofthe-art on conditional image synthesis. When using classifier guidance, we find that we can sample with as few as 25 forward passes while maintaining FIDs comparable to BigGAN. We also compare our improved models to upsampling stacks, finding that the two approaches give complementary improvements and that combining them gives the best results on ImageNet 256×256 and 512×512.
2 Background
In this section, we provide a brief overview of diffusion models. For a more detailed mathematical description, we refer the reader to Appendix B.
On a high level, diffusion models sample from a distribution by reversing a gradual noising process. In particular, sampling starts with noise xT and produces gradually less-noisy samples xT -1, xT -2, ... until reaching a final sample x0. Each timestep t corresponds to a certain noise level, and xt can be thought of as a mixture of a signal x0 with some noise where the signal to noise ratio is determined by the timestep t. For the remainder of this paper, we assume that the noise is drawn from a diagonal Gaussian distribution, which works well for natural images and simplifies various derivations.
2

