arXiv:2404.10351v2 [stat.ML] 21 Nov 2024

On the Use of Relative Validity Indices for Comparing Clustering Approaches
Luke W. Yerbury, Ricardo J.G.B. Campello, G. C. Livingston Jr, Mark Goldsworthy, Lachlan O'Neil

Abstract
Relative Validity Indices (RVIs) such as the Silhouette Width Criterion, Calinski-Harabasz and Davies Bouldin indices are the most widely used tools for evaluating and optimising clustering outcomes. Traditionally, their ability to rank collections of candidate dataset partitions has been used to guide the selection of the number of clusters, and to compare partitions from different clustering algorithms. However, there is a growing trend in the literature to use RVIs when selecting a Similarity Paradigm (SP) for clustering -- the combination of normalisation procedure, representation method, and distance measure which affects the computation of object dissimilarities used in clustering. Despite the growing prevalence of this practice, there has been no empirical or theoretical investigation into the suitability of RVIs for this purpose. Moreover, since RVIs are computed using object dissimilarities, it remains unclear how they would need to be implemented for fair comparisons of different SPs.
This study presents the first comprehensive investigation into the reliability of RVIs for SP selection. We conducted extensive experiments with seven popular RVIs on over 2.7 million clustering partitions of synthetic and real-world datasets, encompassing feature-vector and time-series data. We identified fundamental conceptual limitations undermining the use of RVIs for SP selection, and our empirical findings confirmed this predicted unsuitability. Among our recommendations, we suggest instead that practitioners select SPs by using external validation on high quality labelled datasets or carefully designed outcome-oriented objective criteria, both of which should be informed by careful consideration of dataset characteristics, and domain requirements. Our findings have important implications for clustering methodology and evaluation, suggesting the need for more rigorous approaches to SP selection in clustering applications.

Nomenclature

AMI Adjusted Mutual Information

ARI Adjusted Rand Index

AUCC Area Under Curve for Clustering

BD Braycurtis Distance

CaD Canberra Distance

CD/CoD Cosine Distance

ChD Chebyshev Distance

CHI Calinski-Harabasz Index

CI

C-Index

DBI DI DTW ED EM EVI HMM MD MDS

Davies-Bouldin Index Dunn's Index Dynamic Time Warping Euclidean Distance Expectation-Maximisation External Validity Index Hidden Markov Model Manhattan Distance Multidimensional Scaling

MSM Move-Split-Merge

PCA Principal Component Analysis

RVI Relative Validity Index

SBD Shape-Based Distance

SP

Similarity Paradigm

SWC Silhouette Width Criterion

TWED Time Warping Edit Distance

1 Introduction
Clustering is a ubiquitous data mining technique with the aim of assembling the objects from a dataset into groups [4, 57]. An effective clustering partitions a dataset such that objects within groups will share a greater notion of similarity or homogeneity than objects in different groups. Such partitions are sought for a variety of purposes across a breadth of domains [116], which has resulted in a vast array of clustering approaches and components ranging from the generic to the highly task-specific. Broadly speaking, a majority of clustering approaches can be disassembled into five fundamental components: a data normalisation procedure, a data representation method, a distance measure, a clustering algorithm and a prototype definition [74, 75, 7, 5, 176, 24]. A prototype definition may be enforced within a subroutine of a clustering algorithm, or as an optional data abstraction post-clustering to compactly represent clusters. These five components should be selected carefully when designing candidate clustering approaches for particular domains and applications, as it is widely accepted that all five can bear significant influence on final clustering outcomes. As the normalisation procedure, representation method and distance measure all directly influence the pairwise similarities between objects in the dataset, one combination of these components in this paper is collectively referred to as a Similarity Paradigm (SP).
Due to the unsupervised nature of clustering, there is no way of knowing a priori which combination of clustering components from the extensive literature will most aptly capture the unknown categories in a dataset, and no single combination could be expected to prove superior across many different datasets or domains [169]. Thus the resulting component selection problem is a daunting task, and has been approached in various ways throughout the literature. An
1

understandable reaction to the difficulty of this problem is to select components based on precedents and defaults in the domain and wider clustering literature. This is a common and self-perpetuating system which is unlikely to be optimal in general. At the very least, consideration of domain knowledge and application aims is recommended for reducing the pool of candidate components [64]. Whilst concepts such as cluster stability [97] and various domain-specific, outcometargeted tools (such as forecast error [94]) have been applied sporadically, it seems that cluster components tend to be selected by optimising Relative Validity Indices (RVIs).
Whilst the concept of a cluster may differ between distinct contexts, most RVIs attempt to quantify and juxtapose generally desirable notions of clusters, such as compactness or "high similarity" within groups, and separation or "high dissimilarity" between groups. Popular RVIs include the Silhouette Width Criterion (SWC) [129], the Davies-Bouldin Index (DBI) [38], Dunn's Index (DI) [46] and the Calinski-Harabasz Index (CHI) [27]. RVIs, according to their individual notions of quality, can be used to rank a set of candidate partitions, and subsequently select the best partition. These capabilities have frequently been used to infer the ideal number of clusters (k) for a dataset, referred to hereon as the k-selection task. This application aligns with the original purpose of the vast majority of RVIs. It is a small leap to consider that other model selection problems could also be approached using RVIs, such as selecting the ideal SP for clustering a dataset, which we refer to as the SP-selection task. However, as far as the authors are aware, no RVIs have been proposed, or shown to be suitable for SP-selection, despite widespread use for this purpose.
The computation of RVIs typically requires a pairwise distance matrix at the very least. Both classic and more contemporary RVIs have overwhelmingly been introduced within the context of feature-vector data embedded in a Euclidean space, using the Euclidean distance (or L2-norm) as the default distance measure. Examples in the literature suggest it is reasonable to change this default measure for RVI computations where the data are incompatible, such as when mining communities in networks [123]. Indeed, the authors of the CHI acknowledge that there may be good reasons to use other distance functions, even if they are not defined in terms of the inner products of Euclidean spaces1. This precedent suggests it is likely reasonable to rank and select the best partition out of a collection of candidates by computing an RVI using the same non-Euclidean distance or SP that was employed for clustering.
Now supposing it were reasonable to use RVIs for SP-selection, it is unclear whether each partition should be evaluated using the same SP applied to obtain the partition (hereafter referred to as the "matching-SP" evaluation scheme), or whether a single SP should be maintained for all of the partitions (hereafter referred to as the "fixed-SP" evaluation scheme). Where papers have compared partitions obtained via non-Euclidean paradigms, it is exceedingly rare for them to indicate which of these two options was enforced when computing the RVIs. In [63], [107] and [151] it was suggested that the same distance measure should be used for evaluation that was used for clustering. This approach is supported by a conjecture in [94] that a fixed evaluation paradigm would likely show a bias towards partitions that were produced with the same or similar paradigms. In an attempt to avoid this theorised bias, the authors of [94] proposed a combinatorial scheme inspired by [73], where all combinations of RVI and clustering SP were considered simultaneously for evaluation. All combinations were analysed via a heatmap in [94], whereas the unique RVIs in [73] cast votes for the best SP. These approaches are highly sensitive to the set of candidate SPs, and are more complicated to interpret. Nonetheless, inspired by this cross-test concept, in this paper we considered a third combinatorial evaluation scheme: the arithmetic mean over all candidate fixed schemes (hereafter referred to as the "mean-SP" evaluation scheme).
The main goal of the current paper was to determine whether the continued use of RVIs for selecting an optimal SP should be recommended. This was achieved by investigating the following three fundamental questions:
(i) Do RVIs equipped with a fixed-SP evaluation scheme demonstrate an observable bias towards partitions generated from clustering approaches employing the same SP?
(ii) Is there a difference in reliability between the fixed-SP, matching-SP and mean-SP evaluation schemes for either of the SP- or k-selection tasks?
(iii) Are RVIs as reliable for SP-selection as they are for their conventional application of k-selection?
Our primary contribution addresses these three questions via extensive experimental investigations, involving two complementary methodologies applied to more than 2.7 million clustering partitions across three diverse batteries of benchmark datasets. This empirical work is complemented by several additional contributions:
­ a detailed examination of theoretical issues surrounding RVI use for SP-selection;
­ introducing a comprehensive nomenclature for uniquely describing clustering approaches by their components;
­ a thorough review of recent literature where RVIs have been applied for SP-selection;
­ perspectives on the use of RVIs for the SP-selection task from recent novel RVIs, as well as popular software packages with RVI implementations;
­ practical recommendations for SP-selection in clustering applications, including recommendations for alternatives.
1However, it should not be expected that the mathematical or statistical properties of an RVI will still hold if it is instead computed with an SP or prototype definition other than that with which the properties were derived.
2

