Null-text Inversion for Editing Real Images using Guided Diffusion Models
Ron Mokady*  1,2, Amir Hertz*  1,2, Kfir Aberman1, Yael Pritch1, and Daniel Cohen-Or 1,2
1Google Research, 2The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University

Input Image

DDIM Inversion Null-text Inversion

Prompt-to-Prompt image editing

arXiv:2211.09794v1 [cs.CV] 17 Nov 2022

Input caption: "Zoom photo of flowers."

"...origami flowers..." flowers cupcakes "...wither flowers..." photo sketch

Input caption: "A cat sitting next to a mirror."

"...silver cat sculpture..." cat tiger

"...sleeping cat..." "Watercolor drawing of..."

Figure 1. Null-text inversion for real image editing. Our method takes as input a real image (leftmost column) and an associated caption.

The image is inverted with a DDIM diffusion model to yield a diffusion trajectory (second column to the left). Once inverted, we use the

initial trajectory as a pivot for null-text optimization that accurately reconstructs the input image (third column to the left). Then, we can

edit the inverted image by modifying only the input caption using the editing technique of Prompt-to-Prompt [16] .

Abstract
Recent text-guided diffusion models provide powerful image generation capabilities. Currently, a massive effort is given to enable the modification of these images using text only as means to offer intuitive and versatile editing. To edit a real image using these state-of-the-art tools, one must first invert the image with a meaningful text prompt into the pretrained model's domain. In this paper, we introduce an accurate inversion technique and thus facilitate an intuitive text-based modification of the image. Our proposed inversion consists of two novel key components: (i) Pivotal inversion for diffusion models. While current methods aim at mapping random noise samples to a single input image, we use a single pivotal noise vector for each timestamp and optimize around it. We demonstrate that a direct inversion is inadequate on its own, but does provide a good anchor for our optimization. (ii) null-text optimization, where we only modify the unconditional textual embedding that is used for classifier-free guidance, rather than the input text embedding. This allows for keeping both the model weights and the conditional embedding intact and hence enables applying prompt-based editing while avoiding the cumbersome tuning of the model's weights. Our null-text inversion, based on the publicly available Stable Diffusion model, is extensively evaluated on a variety of images and prompt editing, showing high-fidelity editing of real images.
* Equal contribution. Performed this work while working at Google.

1. Introduction
The progress in image synthesis using text-guided diffusion models has attracted much attention due to their exceptional realism and diversity. Large-scale models [27, 30, 32] have ignited the imagination of multitudes of users, enabling image generation with unprecedented creative freedom. Naturally, this has initiated ongoing research efforts, investigating how to harness these powerful models for image editing. Most recently, intuitive text-based editing was demonstrated over synthesized images, allowing the user to easily manipulate an image using text only [16].
However, text-guided editing of a real image with these state-of-the-art tools requires inverting the given image and textual prompt. That is, finding an initial noise vector that produces the input image when fed with the prompt into the diffusion process while preserving the editing capabilities of the model. The inversion process has recently drawn considerable attention for GANs [7,41], but has not yet been fully addressed for text-guided diffusion models. Although an effective DDIM inversion [13,35] scheme was suggested for unconditional diffusion models, it is found lacking for text-guided diffusion models when classifier-free guidance [18], which is necessary for meaningful editing, is applied.
In this paper, we introduce an effective inversion scheme, achieving near-perfect reconstruction, while retaining the rich text-guided editing capabilities of the original model (see Fig. 1). Our approach is built upon the analysis of two key aspects of guided diffusion models: classifier-free guidance and DDIM inversion.

1

In the widely used classifier-free guidance, in each diffusion step, the prediction is performed twice: once unconditionally and once with the text condition. These predictions are then extrapolated to amplify the effect of the text guidance. While all works concentrate on the conditional prediction, we recognize the substantial effect induced by the unconditional part. Hence, we optimize the embedding used in the unconditional part in order to invert the input image and prompt. We refer to it as null-text optimization, as we replace the embedding of the empty text string with our optimized embedding.
DDIM Inversion consists of performing DDIM sampling in reverse order. Although a slight error is introduced in each step, this works well in the unconditional case. However, in practice, it breaks for text-guided synthesis, since classifier-free guidance magnifies its accumulated error. We observe that it can still offer a promising starting point for the inversion. Inspired by GAN literature, we use the sequence of noised latent codes, obtained from an initial DDIM inversion, as pivot [29]. We then perform our optimization around this pivot to yield an improved and more accurate inversion. We refer to this highly efficient optimization as Diffusion Pivotal Inversion, which stands in contrast to existing works that aim to map all possible noise vectors to a single image.
To the best of our knowledge, our approach is the first to enable the text editing technique of Prompt-to-Prompt [16] on real images. Moreover, unlike recent approaches [19, 39], we do not tune the model weights, thus avoiding damaging the prior of the trained model and duplicating the entire model for each image. Throughout comprehensive ablation study and comparisons, we demonstrate the contribution of our key components to achieving a highfidelity reconstruction of the given real image, while allowing meaningful and intuitive editing abilities. For our code, built upon the publicly available Stable Diffusion model, please visit our project page https://null- textinversion.github.io/.
2. Related Work
Large-scale diffusion models, such as Imagen [32], DALL-E 2 [27], and Stable Diffusion [30], have recently raised the bar for the task of generating images conditioned on plain text, known as text-to-image synthesis. Exploiting the powerful architecture of diffusion models [17, 17, 30, 34­36], these models can generate practically any image by simply feeding a corresponding text, and so have changed the landscape of artistic applications.
However, synthesizing very specific or personal objects which are not widespread in the training data has been challenging. This requires an inversion process that given input images would enable regenerating the depicted object using a text-guided diffusion model. Inversion has been studied extensively for GANs [7, 10, 22, 41, 42, 44], ranging

Input caption: "A baby wearing a blue shirt lying on the sofa."

Input Image

"... blond baby..."

"... floral shirt..."

"... golden shirt..."

"... sleeping baby..."

"baby" "robot"

"sofa" "grass"

"sofa" "ball pit"

Input caption: "A man in glasses eating a doughnut in the park."

Input Image

"... red-haired man..." "glasses" "sunglasses"

"angry man..."

"doughnut" "pizza" "glasses" "Joker mask" "...the park at sunset."

"park" "desert"

Figure 2. Real image editing using our method. We first apply a single null-text inversion over the real input image, achieving high-fidelity reconstruction. Then, various Prompt-to-Prompt textbased editing operations are applied. As can be seen, our inversion scheme provides high fidelity while retaining high editability. See additional examples in Appendix C (Fig. 10).

from latent-based optimization [1, 2] and encoders [28, 38] to feature space encoders [40] and fine-tuning of the model [3, 29]. Motivated by this, Gal et al. [15] suggest a textual inversion scheme for diffusion models that enables regenerating a user-provided concept out of 3 - 5 images. Concurrently, Ruiz et al. [31] tackled the same task with modeltuning. However, these works struggle to edit a given real image while accurately reproducing the unedited parts.
Naturally, recent works have attempted to adapt textguided diffusion models to the fundamental challenge of single-image editing, aiming to exploit their rich and diverse semantic knowledge. Meng et al. [23] add noise to the input image and then perform a text-guided denoising process from a predefined step. Yet, they struggle to accurately preserve the input image details. To overcome this, several works [4, 5, 25] assume that the user provides a mask to restrict the region in which the changes are applied, achieving both meaningful editing and background preservation.
However, requiring that users provide a precise mask is burdensome. Furthermore, masking the image content removes important information, which is mostly ignored in the inpainting process. While some text-only editing approaches are bound to global editing [12, 20, 21], Bar-Tal

2

