Diffusion Schrödinger Bridge with Applications to Score-Based Generative Modeling

arXiv:2106.01357v5 [stat.ML] 5 Apr 2023

Valentin De Bortoli Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK
Jeremy Heng ESSEC Business School,
Singapore

James Thornton Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK
Arnaud Doucet Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, UK

Abstract
Progressively applying Gaussian noise transforms complex data distributions to approximately Gaussian. Reversing this dynamic defines a generative model. When the forward noising process is given by a Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE), Song et al. (2021) demonstrate how the time inhomogeneous drift of the associated reverse-time SDE may be estimated using score-matching. A limitation of this approach is that the forward-time SDE must be run for a sufficiently long time for the final distribution to be approximately Gaussian while ensuring that the corresponding time-discretization error is controlled. In contrast, solving the Schrödinger Bridge (SB) problem, i.e. an entropy-regularized optimal transport problem on path spaces, yields diffusions which generate samples from the data distribution in finite time. We present Diffusion SB (DSB), an original approximation of the Iterative Proportional Fitting (IPF) procedure to solve the SB problem, and provide theoretical analysis along with generative modeling experiments. The first DSB iteration recovers the methodology proposed by Song et al. (2021), with the flexibility of using shorter time intervals, as subsequent DSB iterations reduce the discrepancy between the final-time marginal of the forward (resp. backward) SDE with respect to the Gaussian prior (resp. data) distribution. Beyond generative modeling, DSB offers a computational optimal transport tool as the continuous state-space analogue of the popular Sinkhorn algorithm (Cuturi, 2013).
1 Introduction
Score-Based Generative Modeling (SGM) is a recently developed approach to probabilistic generative modeling that exhibits state-of-the-art performance on several audio and image synthesis tasks; see e.g. Song and Ermon (2019); Cai et al. (2020); Chen et al. (2021a); Kong et al. (2021); Gao et al. (2020); Jolicoeur-Martineau et al. (2021b); Ho et al. (2020); Song and Ermon (2020); Song et al. (2020, 2021); Niu et al. (2020); Durkan and Song (2021); Hoogeboom et al. (2021); Saharia et al. (2021); Luhman and Luhman (2021, 2020); Nichol and Dhariwal (2021); Popov et al. (2021); Dhariwal and Nichol (2021). Existing SGMs generally consist of two parts. Firstly, noise is incrementally added to the data in order to obtain a perturbed data distribution approximating an easy-to-sample prior distribution e.g. Gaussian. Secondly, a neural network is used to learn the reverse-time denoising dynamics, which when initialized at this prior distribution, defines a generative model (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2020; Song and Ermon, 2019; Song et al., 2021). Song et al. (2021) have shown that one could fruitfully view the noising process as a Stochastic Differential Equation (SDE) that progressively perturbs the initial data distribution into an approximately Gaussian one.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), Sydney, Australia.

DSB 1

Forward

DSB Steps

Backward Forward

DSB 5

t=0

Backward t

Generative Model t=T

Figure 1: The reference forward diffusion initialized from the 2-dimensional data distribution fails to converge to the Gaussian prior in T = 0.2 diffusion-time (N = 20 discrete time steps), and the reverse diffusion initialized from the Gaussian prior does not converge to the data distribution. However, convergence does occur after 5 DSB iterations.

The corresponding reverse-time SDE is an inhomogeneous diffusion whose drift depends on the logarithmic gradients of the perturbed data distributions, i.e. the scores. In practice, these scores are approximated using neural networks and score-matching techniques (Hyvärinen and Dayan, 2005; Vincent, 2011) while numerical SDE integrators are used for the sampling procedure.
Although SGM provides state-of-the-art results (Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021), sample generation is computationally expensive. In order to learn the reverse-time SDE from the prior, i.e. the generative model, the forward noising SDE must be run for a sufficiently long time to converge to the prior and the step size must be sufficiently small to obtain a good numerical approximation of this SDE. By reformulating generative modeling as a Schrödinger bridge (SB) problem, we mitigate this issue and propose a novel algorithm to solve SB problems. Our detailed contributions are as follows.
Generative modeling as a Schrödinger bridge problem. The SB problem is a famous entropyregularized Optimal Transport (OT) problem introduced by Schrödinger (1932); see e.g. (Léonard, 2014b; Chen et al., 2021b) for reviews. Given a reference diffusion with finite time horizon T , a data distribution and a prior distribution, solving the SB amounts to finding the closest diffusion to the reference (in terms of Kullback­Leibler divergence on path spaces) which admits the data distribution as marginal at time t = 0 and the prior at time t = T . The reverse-time diffusion solving this SB problem provides a new SGM algorithm which enables approximate sample generation from the data distribution using shorter time intervals compared to the original SGM methods. Our method differs from the entropy-regularized OT formulation in (Genevay et al., 2018), which deals with discrete distributions and relies on a static formulation of SB, as opposed to our dynamical approach for continuous distributions which operates on path spaces. It also differs from (Finlay et al., 2020) which approximates the SB solution by a diffusion whose drift is computed using potentials of the dual formulation of SB. Finally, Wang et al. (2021) have recently proposed to perform generative modeling by solving not one but two SB problems. Contrary to us, they do not formulate generative modeling as computing the SB between the data and prior distributions.
Solving the Schrödinger bridge problem using score-based diffusions. The SB problem can be solved using Iterative Proportional Fitting (IPF) (Fortet, 1940; Kullback, 1968; Chen et al., 2021b). We propose Diffusion SB (DSB), a novel implementation of IPF using score-based diffusion techniques. DSB does not require discretizing the state-space (Chen et al., 2016; Reich, 2019), approximating potential functions using regression (Bernton et al., 2019; Dessein et al., 2017; Pavon et al., 2021), nor performing kernel density estimation (Pavon et al., 2021). The first DSB iteration recovers the method proposed by Song et al. (2021), with the flexibility of using shorter time intervals, as additional DSB iterations reduce the discrepancy between the final-time marginal of the forward (resp. backward) SDE w.r.t. the prior (resp. data) distribution; see Figure 1 for an illustration. An algorithm akin to DSB has been proposed concurrently and independently by Vargas et al. (2021); the main difference
2

