GRAND: Graph Neural Diffusion

arXiv:2106.10934v2 [cs.LG] 22 Sep 2021

Benjamin P. Chamberlain * 1 James Rowbottom * 1 Maria Gorinova 1 Stefan Webb 1 Emanuele Rossi 1 Michael M. Bronstein 1 2 3

Abstract
We present Graph Neural Diffusion (GRAND) that approaches deep learning on graphs as a continuous diffusion process and treats Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) as discretisations of an underlying PDE. In our model, the layer structure and topology correspond to the discretisation choices of temporal and spatial operators. Our approach allows a principled development of a broad new class of GNNs that are able to address the common plights of graph learning models such as depth, oversmoothing, and bottlenecks. Key to the success of our models are stability with respect to perturbations in the data and this is addressed for both implicit and explicit discretisation schemes. We develop linear and nonlinear versions of GRAND, which achieve competitive results on many standard graph benchmarks.
1. Introduction
Machine learning on graphs and graph neural networks (GNNs) have been shown to be successful in a broad range of problems across different domains, extending way beyond machine learning. Important results have been achieved in the physical sciences (Li et al., 2020b;c), where partial differential equations (PDEs) have traditionally been the dominant modelling paradigm.
GNNs are in fact intimately connected to differential equations. The seminal work of Scarselli et al. (2009) was concerned with finding the fixed points of differential equations using the Almeida-Pineda algorithm (Almeida, 1987; Pineda, 1987). The currently predominant message passing paradigm (Gilmer et al., 2017) can be modelled as a differential equation. More recently, diffusion processes have been shown to be an effective preprocessing step for graph learning (Klicpera et al., 2019).
*Equal contribution 1Twitter Inc., London, UK 2Imperial College London, UK 3IDSIA/USI, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Ben Chamberlain <bchamberlain@twitter.com>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

PDEs are among the most studied mathematical constructions, with a vast literature dating back at least to Leonhard Euler in the eighteenth century. This includes various discretisation schemes, numerical methods for approximate solutions, and theorems for their existence and stability. Historically, PDE-based methods have been used extensively in signal and image processing (Perona & Malik, 1990), computer graphics (Sun et al., 2009), and more recently, in machine learning (Chen et al., 2018).
Our goal is to show that the tools of PDEs can be used to understand existing GNN architectures and as a principled way to develop a broad class of new methods. We focus on GNN architectures that can be interpreted as information diffusion on graphs, modelled by the diffusion equation. In doing so, we show that many popular GNN architectures can be derived from a single mathematical framework by different choices of the form of diffusion equation and discretisation schemes. Standard GNNs are equivalent to the explicit single-step Euler scheme that is inefficient and requires small step sizes. We show that more advanced, adaptive multi-step schemes such as Runge-Kutta perform significantly better and using implicit schemes, which are unconditionally stable, amounts to larger multi-hop diffusion operators. Choosing different spatial discretisation amounts to graph rewiring, a technique recently used to improve the performance of GNNs (Klicpera et al., 2019; Alon & Yahav, 2021). We show that appropriate choices within our framework allow the design of deep GNN architectures with tens of layers. This is a feat hard to achieve otherwise due to feature oversmoothing (NT & Maehara, 2019; Oono & Suzuki, 2020) and bottlenecks (Alon & Yahav, 2021) ­ phenomena that are recognised as a common plight of most graph learning architectures.
Main contributions We describe a broad new class of GNNs based on the discretised diffusion PDE on graphs and study different numerical schemes for their solution. Second, we provide stability conditions for these schemes. Finally, based on our model, we develop linear and nonlinear Graph Neural Diffusion (GRAND) architectures that perform competitively on many popular benchmark datasets. We show detailed ablation studies shedding light on the choice of numerical schemes and parameters.

GRAND: Graph Neural Diffusion

2. Background
Central to our work is the notion of diffusion processes. In this section, we provide a concise background on diffusion equations in the continuous setting, on which we build in Section 3 to develop similar notions on graphs. As we are concerned with continuous analogues of graph diffusion and graphs are associated with a broad array of underlying geometries, it is inadequate to formulate these processes in simple flat spaces and more general Riemannian manifolds are required.

Diffusion equation We are interested in studying diffusion processes on . Informally, diffusion describes the movement of a substance from regions of higher to lower concentration. For example, when a hot object is placed on a cold surface, heat will diffuse from the object to the surface until both are of equal temperature.
Let x(t) denote a family of scalar-valued functions on  × [0, ) representing the distribution of some property (which we will assume to be temperature for simplicity) on  at some time, and let x(u, t) be its value at point u   at time t. According to Fourier's law of heat conduction, the heat flux

h = -gx,

is proportional to the temperature gradient x, where g is the diffusivity describing the thermal conductance properties of . An idealized homogeneous setting assumes that g is a constant scalar throughout . More generally, the diffusivity is a inhomogeneous (position-dependent) function that can be scalar-valued (in which case it simply scales the temperature gradient and is isotropic) or matrix-valued (in which case the diffusion is said to be anisotropic, or direction-dependent). The continuity condition xt = -div(h) (roughly meaning that the only change in the temperature is due to the heat flux, as measured by the divergence operator, i.e., heat is not created or destroyed), leads to a PDE referred to as the (heat) diffusion equation,

x(u, t) = div[g(u, x(u, t), t)x(u, t)],
t

with the initial condition x(u, 0) = x0(t); for simplicity,

we assume no boundary conditions. The choice of the diffu-

sivity function determines if the diffusion is homogeneous

(g = c), inhomogeneous (g(u, t)), or anisotropic (A(u, t)).

In the isotropic case, the diffusion equation can be expressed

as

x(u,t) t

=

div(cx)

=

cx,

where

x

=

div(x)

is

the Laplacian operator.

Diffusion on manifolds In our discussion so far we assumed some abstract domain . The structure of the domain is manifested in the definition of the spatial differential operators in the diffusion PDE. In a general setting, we model 

as a Riemannian manifold, and let X () and X (T ) denote the spaces of scalar and (tangent) vector fields on it, respectively. We denote by x, y and X , Y the respective inner products on X () and X (T ). Furthermore, we denote by  : X ()  X (T ) and div =  : X (T )  X () the gradient and divergence operators, which are adjoint w.r.t. the above inner products: x, X = x, div(X ) . Informally, the gradient x of a scalar field x is a vector field providing at each point u   the direction x(u) of the steepest change of x. The divergence div(X ) of a vector field X is a scalar field providing, at each point, the flow of X through an infinitesimal volume. The Laplacian x can be interpreted as the local difference between the value of a scalar field x at a point and its infinitesimal neighbourhood.
Applications of diffusion equations In image processing, diffusion equations were used for nonlinear filtering of images. Given an image x defined on  = [0, 1]2, the non-homogeneous isotropic diffusion equation
x(t) = div [g( x(u, t) )x(u, t)] ,
t
applied to the input image x(u, 0) = x0(u) as the initial condition, is often referred to as Perona-Malik diffusion or (erroneously) anisotropic diffusion (Perona & Malik, 1990). The scalar function g  x(u, t) -1 is referred as an edge indicator and is designed to prevent diffusion across discontinuities (edges) in the image, thus preserving its sharpness while at the same time removing the noise. In computer graphics and geometry processing, non-Euclidean diffusion equations were studied as shape descriptors.

3. Diffusion equations on graphs
We now define diffusion equations on graphs, analogous to Section 2 and argue that formalizing GNNs under the diffusion equation framework provides a principled and rigorous way to develop new architectures for graph learning.

3.1. Graph diffusion equation

Let G = (V, E) be an undirected graph with |V| = n nodes and |E| = e edges, and let x and X denote features defined on nodes and edges respectively.1 The node and edge fields can be represented as n- and e-dimensional vectors assuming some arbitrary ordering of nodes. We adopt the same notation for the respective inner products:

x, y = xiyi
iV

X , Y = wij Xij Yij
i>j

1For simplicity, we assume these features to be scalar-valued and refer to them as node and edge fields, by analogy to scalar and vector fields on manifolds. In the rest of the paper, we assume vector-valued node features, a straightforward extension.

