Moûsai: Efficient Text-to-Music Diffusion Models

Flavio Schneider ETH Zürich
flavio.schneider.97@gmail.com

Ojasv Kamal IIT Kharagpur kamalojasv2000@gmail.com

Zhijing Jin MPI for Intelligent Systems & ETH Zürich
jinzhi@ethz.ch

Bernhard Schölkopf MPI for Intelligent Systems
bs@tue.mpg.de

arXiv:2301.11757v3 [cs.CL] 23 Oct 2023

Abstract
Recent years have seen the rapid development of large generative models for text; however, much less research has explored the connection between text and another "language" of communication ­ music. Music, much like text, can convey emotions, stories, and ideas, and has its own unique structure and syntax. In our work, we bridge text and music via a textto-music generation model that is highly efficient, expressive, and can handle long-term structure. Specifically, we develop Moûsai, a cascading two-stage latent diffusion model that can generate multiple minutes of high-quality stereo music at 48kHz from textual descriptions. Moreover, our model features high efficiency, which enables real-time inference on a single consumer GPU with a reasonable speed. Through experiments and property analyses, we show our model's competence over a variety of criteria compared with existing music generation models. Lastly, to promote the opensource culture, we provide a collection of opensource libraries with the hope of facilitating future work in the field.1
1 Introduction
In recent years, natural language processing (NLP) has made significant strides in understanding and generating human language, due to the advancements in deep learning and large-scale pre-trained models (Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020). While the majority of NLP research has focused on textual data, there exists another rich and expressive "language" of communication ­ music. Music, much like text, can convey emotions (Germer, 2011), stories (Chung, 2006), and ideas (Bicknell, 2002), and has its own unique structure and syntax (Swain, 1995).
Co-first author. Co-supervision. 1We open-source the following: ­ Codes: https://github.com/archinetai/audio-diffusion-pytorch ­ Music samples for this paper: http://bit.ly/44ozWDH ­ Music samples for all models: https://bit.ly/audio-diffusion

Text Description Egyptian Darbuka, Drums, Rythm, (Deluxe Edition),
 2 of 4

Tokenizer

Noise UNet1

TextEncoder Embedding
Transformer


DiffusionGenerator

UNet1

Latent UNet1

Noise

DiffusionDecoder

Audio

UNet2

UNet2

UNet2

UNet2

Figure 1: We propose a two-stage cascading diffusion method, where the first stage compresses the music using a novel diffusion autoencoder, and the second stage generates music from the reduced representation conditioned on the encoding of a textual description.

In this paper, we further bridge the gap between text and music by leveraging the power of NLP techniques to generate music conditioned on textual input. Through our work, we not only aim to expand the scope of NLP applications, but also contribute to the interdisciplinary research at the intersection of language, music, and machine learning techniques.
However, like text, music generation has long been a challenging task, as it requires multiple aspects at different levels of abstraction (van den Oord et al., 2016; Dieleman et al., 2018). Existing audio generation models explore the use of recursive neural networks (Mehri et al., 2017), adversarial generative networks (Kumar et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2021; Engel et al., 2019; Morrison et al., 2022), autoencoders (Deng et al., 2021), and transformers (Yu et al., 2022a). With the recent advancement in diffusion-based generative models in computer

vision (Ramesh et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2022), researchers in speech have also started to explore the use of diffusion models in tasks such as speech synthesis (Kong et al., 2021; Lam et al., 2022; Leng et al., 2022), although only a few these models can apply well to the task of music generation.
Additionally, there are several long-standing challenges in the area of music generation: (1) music generation at length, as most text-to-audio systems (Forsgren and Martiros, 2022; Kreuk et al., 2022) can only generate a few seconds of audio; (2) model efficiency, as many need to run on GPUs for hours to generate just one minute of audio (Dhariwal et al., 2020; Kreuk et al., 2022); (3) lack of diversity of the generated music, as many are limited by their training methods taking in a single modality (resulting in the ability to handle only single-genre music, but not diverse genres) (Caillon and Esling, 2021; Pasini and Schlüter, 2022); and (4) easy controllability by text prompts, as most are only controlled by latent states (Caillon and Esling, 2021; Pasini and Schlüter, 2022), the starting snippet of the music (Borsos et al., 2022), or text but are lyrics (Dhariwal et al., 2020) or descriptions of a daily sound like dog barking (Kreuk et al., 2022).
A single model mastering all these aspects would make a strong contribution to the music industry, as it can enable the broader public to be part of the creative process by allowing them to compose music using an accessible text-based interface, assist creators in finding inspiration, and provide an unlimited supply of novel audio samples.
To address these challenges, we propose Moûsai,2 a novel text-conditional two-stage cascading diffusion model. Specifically, the first stage trains a music encoder by diffusion magnitude-autoencoding (DMAE), which compress audio by the novel diffusion autoencoder; and the second stage learns to generate the reduced representation while conditioning on a textual description by text-conditioned latent diffusion (TCLD). The two-stage generation process is shown in Figure 1.
Apart from proposing the novel text-to-music diffusion model, we also introduce some special designs to boost model efficiency, making the model more accessible. First, our DMAE can achieve an audio signal compression rate of 64x. Moreover, we
2Moûsai is romanized ancient Greek for Muses, the sources of artistic inspiration (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Muses), and also evokes a blend of music and AI.

design a lightweight and specialized 1D U-Net architecture. Together, our model achieves a fast inference speed on a single consumer GPU in minutes, and a training time of approximately one week per stage on one A100 GPU, making it possible to train and run the overall system using resources available in most universities.
We train our model on a newly collected dataset, TEXT2MUSIC, with 50K text-music pairs covering diverse music genres. Remarkably, our diffusionbased model improves significantly on previous models, as it can be trained on a variety of music genres, generate long-context music for several minutes with a high quality of 48kHz stereo music, run real-time inference efficiently within minutes, and can be easily controlled by text. Our extensive evaluations on 11 criteria also validate the quality of the generated music by our model from multiple perspectives, such as text-music relevance, and music quality.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
1. We are the first to propose the text-to-music diffusion model using a two-stage cascading latent diffusion modeling process.
2. We achieve high efficiency with a compression rate of 64x, and a specialized U-Net design, which achieves a training time of one week on an A100 consumer GPU, and realtime inference time.
3. We collect TEXT2MUSIC, a dataset of 50K text-music pairs constituting 2,500 hours of music.
4. Our model outperforms existing baselines by clear margins on 11 different evaluation criteria, demonstrating merits such as high efficiency, text-music relevance, music quality, and long-context structure.
2 Related Work
Connecting Text and Music The connection between text and music lies in the intersection of NLP and computational musicology. Previous work looks into aspects such as the similarity of music and linguistic structures (Papadimitriou and Jurafsky, 2020), music and dialog (Berlingerio and Bonin, 2018), and jointly modeling music and text for emotion detection (Mihalcea and Strapparava, 2012). Apart from several work that generates music from text (Dhariwal et al., 2020; Forsgren and

