arXiv:2209.14988v1 [cs.CV] 29 Sep 2022

DREAMFUSION: TEXT-TO-3D USING 2D DIFFUSION
Ben Poole1, Ajay Jain2, Jonathan T. Barron1, Ben Mildenhall1 1Google Research, 2UC Berkeley {pooleb, barron, bmild}@google.com, ajayj@berkeley.edu
ABSTRACT
Recent breakthroughs in text-to-image synthesis have been driven by diffusion models trained on billions of image-text pairs. Adapting this approach to 3D synthesis would require large-scale datasets of labeled 3D data and efficient architectures for denoising 3D data, neither of which currently exist. In this work, we circumvent these limitations by using a pretrained 2D text-to-image diffusion model to perform text-to-3D synthesis. We introduce a loss based on probability density distillation that enables the use of a 2D diffusion model as a prior for optimization of a parametric image generator. Using this loss in a DeepDream-like procedure, we optimize a randomly-initialized 3D model (a Neural Radiance Field, or NeRF) via gradient descent such that its 2D renderings from random angles achieve a low loss. The resulting 3D model of the given text can be viewed from any angle, relit by arbitrary illumination, or composited into any 3D environment. Our approach requires no 3D training data and no modifications to the image diffusion model, demonstrating the effectiveness of pretrained image diffusion models as priors. See dreamfusion3d.github.io for a more immersive view into our 3D results.
1 INTRODUCTION
Generative image models conditioned on text now support high-fidelity, diverse and controllable image synthesis (Nichol et al., 2022; Ramesh et al., 2021; 2022; Saharia et al., 2022; 2021a; Yu et al., 2022; Saharia et al., 2021b). These quality improvements have come from large aligned image-text datasets (Schuhmann et al., 2022) and scalable generative model architectures. Diffusion models are particularly effective at learning high-quality image generators with a stable and scalable denoising objective (Ho et al., 2020; Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song et al., 2021). Applying diffusion models to other modalities has been successful, but requires large amounts of modality-specific training data (Chen et al., 2020; Ho et al., 2022; Kong et al., 2021). In this work, we develop techniques to transfer pretrained 2D image-text diffusion models to 3D object synthesis, without any 3D data (see Figure 1). Though 2D image generation is widely applicable, simulators and digital media like video games and movies demand thousands of detailed 3D assets to populate rich interactive environments. 3D assets are currently designed by hand in modeling software like Blender and Maya3D, a process requiring a great deal of time and expertise. Text-to-3D generative models could lower the barrier to entry for novices and improve the workflow of experienced artists.
3D generative models can be trained on explicit representations of structure like voxels (Wu et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2018) and point clouds (Yang et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2021), but the 3D data needed is relatively scarce compared to plentiful 2D images. Our approach learns 3D structure using only a 2D diffusion model trained on images, and sidesteps this issue. GANs can learn controllable 3D generators from photographs of a single object category, by placing an adversarial loss on 2D image renderings of the output 3D object or scene (Henzler et al., 2019; Nguyen-Phuoc et al., 2019; Or-El et al., 2022). Though these approaches have yielded promising results on specific object categories such as faces, they have not yet been demonstrated to support arbitrary text.
Neural Radiance Fields, or NeRF (Mildenhall et al., 2020) are an approach towards inverse rendering in which a volumetric raytracer is combined with a neural mapping from spatial coordinates to color and volumetric density. NeRF has become a critical tool for neural inverse rendering (Tewari et al., 2022). Originally, NeRF was found to work well for "classic" 3D reconstruction tasks: many images of a scene are provided as input to a model, and a NeRF is optimized to recover the geometry of that specific scene, which allows for novel views of that scene from unobserved angles to be synthesized.
1

an orangutan making a clay bowl on a throwing wheel*

a raccoon astronaut holding his helmet

a blue jay standing on a large basket of rainbow macarons*

a corgi taking a selfie*

a table with dim sum on it

a lion reading the newspaper*

Michelangelo style statue of dog reading news on a cellphone

a tiger dressed as a doctor*

a steam engine train, high resolution*

a frog wearing a sweater*

a humanoid robot playing the cello*

Sydney opera house, aerial view

an all-utility vehicle driving across a stream

a chimpanzee dressed like Henry VIII king of England*

a baby bunny sitting on top of a stack of pancakes

a sliced loaf of fresh bread

a bulldozer clearing away a pile of snow*

a classic Packard car*

zoomed out view of Tower Bridge made out of gingerbread and candy a robot and dinosaur playing chess, high resolution*

a squirrel gesturing in front of an easel showing colorful pie charts

Figure 1: DreamFusion uses a pretrained text-to-image diffusion model to generate realistic 3D

models from text prompts. Rendered 3D models are presented from two views, with textureless ren-

ders and normals to the right. See dreamfusion3d.github.io for videos of these results. Symbols

indicate the following prompt prefixes which we found helped to improve the quality and realism:

* a DSLR photo of...

 a zoomed out DSLR photo of...

 a wide angle zoomed out DSLR photo of...

2

