GLIDE: Towards Photorealistic Image Generation and Editing with Text-Guided Diffusion Models

arXiv:2112.10741v3 [cs.CV] 8 Mar 2022

Alex Nichol * Prafulla Dhariwal * Aditya Ramesh * Pranav Shyam Pamela Mishkin Bob McGrew Ilya Sutskever Mark Chen

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently been shown to generate high-quality synthetic images, especially when paired with a guidance technique to trade off diversity for fidelity. We explore diffusion models for the problem of text-conditional image synthesis and compare two different guidance strategies: CLIP guidance and classifier-free guidance. We find that the latter is preferred by human evaluators for both photorealism and caption similarity, and often produces photorealistic samples. Samples from a 3.5 billion parameter text-conditional diffusion model using classifierfree guidance are favored by human evaluators to those from DALL-E, even when the latter uses expensive CLIP reranking. Additionally, we find that our models can be fine-tuned to perform image inpainting, enabling powerful text-driven image editing. We train a smaller model on a filtered dataset and release the code and weights at https://github.com/openai/glide-text2im.
1. Introduction
Images, such as illustrations, paintings, and photographs, can often be easily described using text, but can require specialized skills and hours of labor to create. Therefore, a tool capable of generating realistic images from natural language can empower humans to create rich and diverse visual content with unprecedented ease. The ability to edit images using natural language further allows for iterative refinement and fine-grained control, both of which are critical for real world applications.
Recent text-conditional image models are capable of synthesizing images from free-form text prompts, and can compose unrelated objects in semantically plausible ways (Xu et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2019; Tao et al., 2020; Ramesh et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021). However, they are not yet able to generate photorealistic images that capture all aspects of
Equal contribution. Correspondence to alex@openai.com, prafulla@openai.com, aramesh@openai.com

their corresponding text prompts.
On the other hand, unconditional image models can synthesize photorealistic images (Brock et al., 2018; Karras et al., 2019a;b; Razavi et al., 2019), sometimes with enough fidelity that humans can't distinguish them from real images (Zhou et al., 2019). Within this line of research, diffusion models (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2020b) have emerged as a promising family of generative models, achieving state-of-the-art sample quality on a number of image generation benchmarks (Ho et al., 2020; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021; Ho et al., 2021).
To achieve photorealism in the class-conditional setting, Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) augmented diffusion models with classifier guidance, a technique which allows diffusion models to condition on a classifier's labels. The classifier is first trained on noised images, and during the diffusion sampling process, gradients from the classifier are used to guide the sample towards the label. Ho & Salimans (2021) achieved similar results without a separately trained classifier through the use of classifier-free guidance, a form of guidance that interpolates between predictions from a diffusion model with and without labels.
Motivated by the ability of guided diffusion models to generate photorealistic samples and the ability of text-to-image models to handle free-form prompts, we apply guided diffusion to the problem of text-conditional image synthesis. First, we train a 3.5 billion parameter diffusion model that uses a text encoder to condition on natural language descriptions. Next, we compare two techniques for guiding diffusion models towards text prompts: CLIP guidance and classifier-free guidance. Using human and automated evaluations, we find that classifier-free guidance yields higherquality images.
We find that samples from our model generated with classifier-free guidance are both photorealistic and reflect a wide breadth of world knowledge. When evaluated by human judges, our samples are preferred to those from DALL-E (Ramesh et al., 2021) 87% of the time when evaluated for photorealism, and 69% of the time when evaluated for caption similarity.

GLIDE: Towards Photorealistic Image Generation and Editing with Text-Guided Diffusion Models

"a hedgehog using a calculator"

"a corgi wearing a red bowtie and a purple party hat"

"robots meditating in a vipassana retreat"

"a fall landscape with a small cottage next to a lake"

"a surrealist dream-like oil painting by salvador dal´i of a cat playing checkers"

"a professional photo of a sunset behind the grand
canyon"

"a high-quality oil painting of a psychedelic hamster
dragon"

"an illustration of albert einstein wearing a superhero
costume"

"a boat in the canals of venice"

"a painting of a fox in the style of starry night"

"a red cube on top of a blue cube"

"a stained glass window of a panda eating bamboo"

"a crayon drawing of a space elevator" "a futuristic city in synthwave style"

"a pixel art corgi pizza"

"a fog rolling into new york"

Figure 1. Selected samples from GLIDE using classifier-free guidance. We observe that our model can produce photorealistic images with shadows and reflections, can compose multiple concepts in the correct way, and can produce artistic renderings of novel concepts. For random sample grids, see Figure 17 and 18.

While our model can render a wide variety of text prompts zero-shot, it can can have difficulty producing realistic images for complex prompts. Therefore, we provide our model with editing capabilities in addition to zero-shot generation,

which allows humans to iteratively improve model samples until they match more complex prompts. Specifically, we fine-tune our model to perform image inpainting, finding that it is capable of making realistic edits to existing im-

