Generative Modeling by Estimating Gradients of the Data Distribution

arXiv:1907.05600v3 [cs.LG] 10 Oct 2020

Yang Song Stanford University yangsong@cs.stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon Stanford University ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
We introduce a new generative model where samples are produced via Langevin dynamics using gradients of the data distribution estimated with score matching. Because gradients can be ill-defined and hard to estimate when the data resides on low-dimensional manifolds, we perturb the data with different levels of Gaussian noise, and jointly estimate the corresponding scores, i.e., the vector fields of gradients of the perturbed data distribution for all noise levels. For sampling, we propose an annealed Langevin dynamics where we use gradients corresponding to gradually decreasing noise levels as the sampling process gets closer to the data manifold. Our framework allows flexible model architectures, requires no sampling during training or the use of adversarial methods, and provides a learning objective that can be used for principled model comparisons. Our models produce samples comparable to GANs on MNIST, CelebA and CIFAR-10 datasets, achieving a new state-of-the-art inception score of 8.87 on CIFAR-10. Additionally, we demonstrate that our models learn effective representations via image inpainting experiments.
1 Introduction
Generative models have many applications in machine learning. To list a few, they have been used to generate high-fidelity images [26, 6], synthesize realistic speech and music fragments [58], improve the performance of semi-supervised learning [28, 10], detect adversarial examples and other anomalous data [54], imitation learning [22], and explore promising states in reinforcement learning [41]. Recent progress is mainly driven by two approaches: likelihood-based methods [17, 29, 11, 60] and generative adversarial networks (GAN [15]). The former uses log-likelihood (or a suitable surrogate) as the training objective, while the latter uses adversarial training to minimize f -divergences [40] or integral probability metrics [2, 55] between model and data distributions.
Although likelihood-based models and GANs have achieved great success, they have some intrinsic limitations. For example, likelihood-based models either have to use specialized architectures to build a normalized probability model (e.g., autoregressive models, flow models), or use surrogate losses (e.g., the evidence lower bound used in variational auto-encoders [29], contrastive divergence in energy-based models [21]) for training. GANs avoid some of the limitations of likelihood-based models, but their training can be unstable due to the adversarial training procedure. In addition, the GAN objective is not suitable for evaluating and comparing different GAN models. While other objectives exist for generative modeling, such as noise contrastive estimation [19] and minimum probability flow [50], these methods typically only work well for low-dimensional data.
In this paper, we explore a new principle for generative modeling based on estimating and sampling from the (Stein) score [33] of the logarithmic data density, which is the gradient of the log-density function at the input data point. This is a vector field pointing in the direction where the log data density grows the most. We use a neural network trained with score matching [24] to learn this vector field from data. We then produce samples using Langevin dynamics, which approximately
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

works by gradually moving a random initial sample to high density regions along the (estimated) vector field of scores. However, there are two main challenges with this approach. First, if the data distribution is supported on a low dimensional manifold--as it is often assumed for many real world datasets--the score will be undefined in the ambient space, and score matching will fail to provide a consistent score estimator. Second, the scarcity of training data in low data density regions, e.g., far from the manifold, hinders the accuracy of score estimation and slows down the mixing of Langevin dynamics sampling. Since Langevin dynamics will often be initialized in low-density regions of the data distribution, inaccurate score estimation in these regions will negatively affect the sampling process. Moreover, mixing can be difficult because of the need of traversing low density regions to transition between modes of the distribution.
To tackle these two challenges, we propose to perturb the data with random Gaussian noise of various magnitudes. Adding random noise ensures the resulting distribution does not collapse to a low dimensional manifold. Large noise levels will produce samples in low density regions of the original (unperturbed) data distribution, thus improving score estimation. Crucially, we train a single score network conditioned on the noise level and estimate the scores at all noise magnitudes. We then propose an annealed version of Langevin dynamics, where we initially use scores corresponding to the highest noise level, and gradually anneal down the noise level until it is small enough to be indistinguishable from the original data distribution. Our sampling strategy is inspired by simulated annealing [30, 37] which heuristically improves optimization for multimodal landscapes.
Our approach has several desirable properties. First, our objective is tractable for almost all parameterizations of the score networks without the need of special constraints or architectures, and can be optimized without adversarial training, MCMC sampling, or other approximations during training. The objective can also be used to quantitatively compare different models on the same dataset. Experimentally, we demonstrate the efficacy of our approach on MNIST, CelebA [34], and CIFAR-10 [31]. We show that the samples look comparable to those generated from modern likelihood-based models and GANs. On CIFAR-10, our model sets the new state-of-the-art inception score of 8.87 for unconditional generative models, and achieves a competitive FID score of 25.32. We show that the model learns meaningful representations of the data by image inpainting experiments.

2 Score-based generative modeling
Suppose our dataset consists of i.i.d. samples {xi  RD}Ni=1 from an unknown data distribution pdata(x). We define the score of a probability density p(x) to be x log p(x). The score network s : RD  RD is a neural network parameterized by , which will be trained to approximate the score of pdata(x). The goal of generative modeling is to use the dataset to learn a model for generating new samples from pdata(x). The framework of score-based generative modeling has two ingredients: score matching and Langevin dynamics.

2.1 Score matching for score estimation

Score matching [24] is originally designed for learning non-normalized statistical models based on

i.i.d. samples from an unknown data distribution. Following [53], we repurpose it for score estimation.

Using score matching, we can directly train a score network s(x) to estimate x log pdata(x) without training a model to estimate pdata(x) first. Different from the typical usage of score matching, we opt

not to use the gradient of an energy-based model as the score network to avoid extra computation due

to higher-order gradients. The objective minimizes

1 2

Epdata

[

s(x) - x log pdata(x)

2 2

],

which

can

be shown equivalent to the following up to a constant

Epdata (x)

1 tr(xs(x)) + 2

s (x)

2 2

,

(1)

where xs(x) denotes the Jacobian of s(x). As shown in [53], under some regularity conditions the minimizer of Eq. (3) (denoted as s (x)) satisfies s (x) = x log pdata(x) almost surely. In practice, the expectation over pdata(x) in Eq. (1) can be quickly estimated using data samples. However, score matching is not scalable to deep networks and high dimensional data [53] due to the
computation of tr(xs(x)). Below we discuss two popular methods for large scale score matching.

Denoising score matching Denoising score matching [61] is a variant of score matching that completely circumvents tr(xs(x)). It first perturbs the data point x with a pre-specified noise

2

