Alias-Free Generative Adversarial Networks

arXiv:2106.12423v4 [cs.CV] 18 Oct 2021

Tero Karras NVIDIA

Miika Aittala NVIDIA

Erik Härkönen Aalto University and NVIDIA

Jaakko Lehtinen NVIDIA and Aalto University

Samuli Laine NVIDIA
Janne Hellsten NVIDIA
Timo Aila NVIDIA

Abstract
We observe that despite their hierarchical convolutional nature, the synthesis process of typical generative adversarial networks depends on absolute pixel coordinates in an unhealthy manner. This manifests itself as, e.g., detail appearing to be glued to image coordinates instead of the surfaces of depicted objects. We trace the root cause to careless signal processing that causes aliasing in the generator network. Interpreting all signals in the network as continuous, we derive generally applicable, small architectural changes that guarantee that unwanted information cannot leak into the hierarchical synthesis process. The resulting networks match the FID of StyleGAN2 but differ dramatically in their internal representations, and they are fully equivariant to translation and rotation even at subpixel scales. Our results pave the way for generative models better suited for video and animation.
1 Introduction
The resolution and quality of images produced by generative adversarial networks (GAN) [21] have seen rapid improvement recently [31, 11, 33, 34]. They have been used for a variety of applications, including image editing [49, 55, 43, 22, 39, 3], domain translation [70, 37, 61, 42], and video generation [57, 15, 24]. While several ways of controlling the generative process have been found [8, 29, 10, 42, 25, 2, 7, 48, 6], the foundations of the synthesis process remain only partially understood.
In the real world, details of different scale tend to transform hierarchically. For instance, moving a head causes the nose to move, which in turn moves the skin pores on it. The structure of a typical GAN generator is analogous: coarse, low-resolution features are hierarchically refined by upsampling layers, locally mixed by convolutions, and new detail is introduced through nonlinearities. We observe that despite this superficial similarity, current GAN architectures do not synthesize images in a natural hierarchical manner: the coarse features mainly control the presence of finer features, but not their precise positions. Instead, much of the fine detail appears to be fixed in pixel coordinates. This disturbing "texture sticking" is clearly visible in latent interpolations (see Figure 1 and our accompanying videos on the project page https://nvlabs.github.io/stylegan3), breaking the illusion of a solid and coherent object moving in space. Our goal is an architecture that exhibits a more natural transformation hierarchy, where the exact sub-pixel position of each feature is exclusively inherited from the underlying coarse features.
This work was done during an internship at NVIDIA.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021).

StyleGAN2

Ours

StyleGAN2
 latent interpolation 

Ours
 latent interpolation 

Averaged Central

Figure 1: Examples of "texture sticking". Left: The average of images generated from a small neighborhood around a central latent (top row). The intended result is uniformly blurry because all details should move together. However, with StyleGAN2 many details (e.g., fur) stick to the same pixel coordinates, showing unwanted sharpness. Right: From a latent space interpolation (top row), we extract a short vertical segment of pixels from each generated image and stack them horizontally (bottom). The desired result is hairs moving in animation, creating a time-varying field. With StyleGAN2 the hairs mostly stick to the same coordinates, creating horizontal streaks instead.
It turns out that current networks can partially bypass the ideal hierarchical construction by drawing on unintentional positional references available to the intermediate layers through image borders [28, 35, 66], per-pixel noise inputs [33] and positional encodings, and aliasing [5, 69]. Aliasing, despite being a subtle and critical issue [44], has received little attention in the GAN literature. We identify two sources for it: 1) faint after-images of the pixel grid resulting from non-ideal upsampling filters2 such as nearest, bilinear, or strided convolutions, and 2) the pointwise application of nonlinearities such as ReLU [60] or swish [47]. We find that the network has the means and motivation to amplify even the slightest amount of aliasing and combining it over multiple scales allows it to build a basis for texture motifs that are fixed in screen coordinates. This holds for all filters commonly used in deep learning [69, 59], and even high-quality filters used in image processing.
How, then, do we eliminate the unwanted side information and thereby stop the network from using it? While borders can be solved by simply operating on slightly larger images, aliasing is much harder. We begin by noting that aliasing is most naturally treated in the classical Shannon-Nyquist signal processing framework, and switch focus to bandlimited functions on a continuous domain that are merely represented by discrete sample grids. Now, successful elimination of all sources of positional references means that details can be generated equally well regardless of pixel coordinates, which in turn is equivalent to enforcing continuous equivariance to sub-pixel translation (and optionally rotation) in all layers. To achieve this, we describe a comprehensive overhaul of all signal processing aspects of the StyleGAN2 generator [34]. Our contributions include the surprising finding that current upsampling filters are simply not aggressive enough in suppressing aliasing, and that extremely high-quality filters with over 100dB attenuation are required. Further, we present a principled solution to aliasing caused by pointwise nonlinearities [5] by considering their effect in the continuous domain and appropriately low-pass filtering the results. We also show that after the overhaul, a model based on 1×1 convolutions yields a strong, rotation equivariant generator.
Once aliasing is adequately suppressed to force the model to implement more natural hierarchical refinement, its mode of operation changes drastically: the emergent internal representations now include coordinate systems that allow details to be correctly attached to the underlying surfaces. This promises significant improvements to models that generate video and animation. The new StyleGAN3 generator matches StyleGAN2 in terms of FID [26], while being slightly heavier computationally. Our implementation and pre-trained models are available at https://github.com/NVlabs/stylegan3
Several recent works have studied the lack of translation equivariance in CNNs, mainly in the context of classification [28, 35, 66, 5, 38, 69, 12, 71, 59]. We significantly expand upon the antialiasing measures in this literature and show that doing so induces a fundamentally altered image generation behavior. Group-equivariant CNNs aim to generalize the efficiency benefits of translational weight
2Consider nearest neighbor upsampling. If we upsample a 4×4 image to 8×8, the original pixels will be clearly visible, allowing one to reliably distinguish between even and odd pixels. Since the same is true on all scales, this (leaked) information makes it possible to reconstruct even the absolute pixel coordinates. With better filters such as bilinear or bicubic, the clues get less pronounced, but are nevertheless evident for the generator.
2

