Improved Techniques for Training Score-Based Generative Models

arXiv:2006.09011v2 [cs.LG] 23 Oct 2020

Yang Song Computer Science Department
Stanford University yangsong@cs.stanford.edu

Stefano Ermon Computer Science Department
Stanford University ermon@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Score-based generative models can produce high quality image samples comparable to GANs, without requiring adversarial optimization. However, existing training procedures are limited to images of low resolution (typically below 32 × 32), and can be unstable under some settings. We provide a new theoretical analysis of learning and sampling from score-based models in high dimensional spaces, explaining existing failure modes and motivating new solutions that generalize across datasets. To enhance stability, we also propose to maintain an exponential moving average of model weights. With these improvements, we can scale scorebased generative models to various image datasets, with diverse resolutions ranging from 64 × 64 to 256 × 256. Our score-based models can generate high-fidelity samples that rival best-in-class GANs on various image datasets, including CelebA, FFHQ, and several LSUN categories.
1 Introduction
Score-based generative models [1] represent probability distributions through score--a vector field pointing in the direction where the likelihood of data increases most rapidly. Remarkably, these score functions can be learned from data without requiring adversarial optimization, and can produce realistic image samples that rival GANs on simple datasets such as CIFAR-10 [2].
Despite this success, existing score-based generative models only work on low resolution images (32 × 32) due to several limiting factors. First, the score function is learned via denoising score matching [3, 4, 5]. Intuitively, this means a neural network (named the score network) is trained to denoise images blurred with Gaussian noise. A key insight from [1] is to perturb the data using multiple noise scales so that the score network captures both coarse and fine-grained image features. However, it is an open question how these noise scales should be chosen. The recommended settings in [1] work well for 32 × 32 images, but perform poorly when the resolution gets higher. Second, samples are generated by running Langevin dynamics [6, 7]. This method starts from white noise and progressively denoises it into an image using the score network. This procedure, however, might fail or take an extremely long time to converge when used in high-dimensions and with a necessarily imperfect (learned) score network.
We propose a set of techniques to scale score-based generative models to high resolution images. Based on a new theoretical analysis on a simplified mixture model, we provide a method to analytically compute an effective set of Gaussian noise scales from training data. Additionally, we propose an efficient architecture to amortize the score estimation task across a large (possibly infinite) number of noise scales with a single neural network. Based on a simplified analysis of the convergence properties of the underlying Langevin dynamics sampling procedure, we also derive a technique to approximately optimize its performance as a function of the noise scales. Combining these techniques with an exponential moving average (EMA) of model parameters, we are able to significantly improve
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

Figure 1: Generated samples on datasets of decreasing resolutions. From left to right: FFHQ 256 × 256, LSUN bedroom 128 × 128, LSUN tower 128 × 128, LSUN church_outdoor 96 × 96, and CelebA 64 × 64.

the sample quality, and successfully scale to images of resolutions ranging from 64 × 64 to 256 × 256, which was previously impossible for score-based generative models. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the samples are sharp and diverse.

2 Background

2.1 Langevin dynamics

For any continuously differentiable probability density p(x), we call x log p(x) its score function. In many situations the score function is easier to model and estimate than the original probability

density function [3, 8]. For example, for an unnormalized density it does not depend on the partition

function. Once the score function is known, we can employ Langevin dynamics to sample from the

corresponding distribution. Given a step size  > 0, a total number of iterations T , and an initial

sample x0 from any prior distribution (x), Langevin dynamics iteratively evaluate the following



xt  xt-1 +  x log p(xt-1) + 2 zt, 1  t  T

(1)

where zt  N (0, I). When  is sufficiently small and T is sufficiently large, the distribution of xT will be close to p(x) under some regularity conditions [6, 7]. Suppose we have a neural network s(x) (called the score network) parameterized by , and it has been trained such that s(x)  x log p(x). We can approximately generate samples from p(x) using Langevin dynamics by replacing x log p(xt-1) with s(xt-1) in Eq. (1). Note that Eq. (1) can be interpreted as noisy gradient ascent on the log-density log p(x).

2.2 Score-based generative modeling
We can estimate the score function from data and generate new samples with Langevin dynamics. This idea was named score-based generative modeling by ref. [1]. Because the estimated score function is inaccurate in regions without training data, Langevin dynamics may not converge correctly when a sampling trajectory encounters those regions (see more detailed analysis in ref. [1]). As a remedy, ref. [1] proposes to perturb the data with Gaussian noise of different intensities and jointly estimate the score functions of all noise-perturbed data distributions. During inference, they combine the information from all noise scales by sampling from each noise-perturbed distribution sequentially with Langevin dynamics.
More specifically, suppose we have an underlying data distribution pdata(x) and consider a sequence of noise scales {i}Li=1 that satisfies 1 > 2 > · · · > L. Let p(x~ | x) = N (x~ | x, 2I), and denote the corresponding perturbed data distribution as p(x~) p(x~ | x)pdata(x)dx. Ref. [1]

2

