AudioLDM: Text-to-Audio Generation with Latent Diffusion Models

arXiv:2301.12503v3 [cs.SD] 9 Sep 2023

Haohe Liu * 1 Zehua Chen * 2 Yi Yuan 1 Xinhao Mei 1 Xubo Liu 1 Danilo Mandic 2 Wenwu Wang 1 Mark D. Plumbley 1

Abstract
Text-to-audio (TTA) systems have recently gained attention for their ability to synthesize general audio based on text descriptions. However, previous studies in TTA have limited generation quality with high computational costs. In this study, we propose AudioLDM, a TTA system that is built on a latent space to learn continuous audio representations from contrastive language-audio pretraining (CLAP) embeddings. The pretrained CLAP models enable us to train LDMs with audio embeddings while providing text embeddings as the condition during sampling. By learning the latent representations of audio signals without modelling the cross-modal relationship, AudioLDM improves both generation quality and computational efficiency. Trained on AudioCaps with a single GPU, AudioLDM achieves stateof-the-art TTA performance compared to other open-sourced systems, measured by both objective and subjective metrics. AudioLDM is also the first TTA system that enables various textguided audio manipulations (e.g., style transfer) in a zero-shot fashion. Our implementation and demos are available at https://audioldm. github.io.
1. Introduction
Generating sound effects, music, or speech according to personalized requirements is important for applications such as augmented and virtual reality, game development, and video editing. Traditionally, audio generation has been achieved through signal processing techniques (Andresen, 1979; Karplus & Strong, 1983). In recent years, gener-
*Equal contribution 1Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing (CVSSP), University of Surrey, Guildford, UK 2Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, London, UK. Correspondence to: Haohe Liu <haohe.liu@surrey.ac.uk>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright 2023 by the author(s).

ative models (Oord et al., 2016; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021; Tan et al., 2022), either unconditional or conditioned on other modalities (Kreuk et al., 2022; Z elaszczyk & Man´dziuk, 2022), have revolutionized this task. Previous studies primarily worked on the label-to-sound setting with a small set of labels (Liu et al., 2021b; Pascual et al., 2022) such as the ten sound classes in the UrbanSound8K dataset (Salamon et al., 2014). In comparison, natural language is considerably more flexible than labels as they can include fine-grained descriptions of audio signals, such as pitch, acoustic environment, and temporal order. The task of generating audio prompted with natural language descriptions is known as text-to-audio (TTA) generation.
TTA systems are designed to generate a wide range of highdimensional audio signals. To efficiently model the data, we adopt a similar approach as DiffSound (Yang et al., 2022) by employing a learned discrete representation to efficiently model high-dimensional audio signals. We also draw inspiration from the recent advancements in autoregressive modelling of discrete representation learnt on the waveform, such as AudioGen (Kreuk et al., 2022), which has surpassed the capabilities of DiffSound. Building on the success of StableDiffusion (Rombach et al., 2022), which uses latent diffusion models (LDMs) for high-quality image generation, we extend previous TTA approaches to continuous latent representations, instead of learning discrete representations. Additionally, as audio manipulations, such as style transfer (Engel et al., 2020; Pascual et al., 2022), are desired for some applications such as games, we explore and achieve various zero-shot text-guided audio manipulations with LDMs, which have not been demonstrated before.
For previous TTA works, a potential limitation for generation quality is the requirement of large-scale high-quality audio-text data pairs, which are usually not readily available, and where they are available, are of limited quality and quantity (Liu et al., 2022f). To better utilize the low-quality data, several methods for text preprocessing have been proposed (Kreuk et al., 2022; Yang et al., 2022). However, these preprocessing steps limit generation performances by overlooking the relations of sound events (e.g., a dog is barking at the bark is transformed into dog bark park). By comparison, our proposed method only requires audio data for generative model training, circumvents the challenge of

1

AudioLDM: Text-to-Audio Generation with Latent Diffusion Models

STFT+MelFB

Audio data 

Audio Encoder

( ) !~(0, )

VAE Encoder

Contrastive objective

"A cat meowing then screaming as
a young boy talking with no background noise"
Text prompt 

Text Encoder

Latent Diffusion

  #×%&×'&

* )

VAE Decoder

Generated audio 0

Vocoder

+ %×'

Training

Sampling

(a) Training and sampling process of AudioLDM

Text prompt  : "Flying insects. Mosquito"

  %×'

VAE Encoder
12  #×%&×'&

Text Encoder
* )
Latent Diffusion
!~(0, )

VAE Decoder
1  #×%&×'&

(b) Audio inpainting with AudioLDM

Text prompt  : "Flying insects. Mosquito"
VAE Encoder   %×'   #×%&×'&
Forward Diffusion

Text Encoder
* )
Latent Diffusion

VAE Decoder
1  #×%&×'&



(c) Audio style transfer with AudioLDM

+  %×' +  %×'

Figure 1. Overview of the AudioLDM system for text-to-audio generation (a). During training, latent diffusion models (LDMs) are conditioned on an audio embedding Ex and trained in a continuous space z0 learned by VAE. The sampling process uses text embedding Ey as the condition. Given a pretrained LDM, zero-shot audio inpainting (b) and style transfer (c) are realized in the reverse diffusion
process of LDM. The block Forward Diffusion denotes the process that corrupt data with gaussian noise (see Equation 2).

text preprocessing, and performs better than using audio-text paired data, as we will discuss later.
In this work, we present a TTA system, AudioLDM, which achieves high generation quality with continuous LDMs, with good computational efficiency and enables text-conditional audio manipulations. The overview of AudioLDM design for TTA generation and text-guided audio manipulation is shown in Figure 1. Specifically, AudioLDM learns to generate the representation in a latent space encoded by a mel-spectrogram-based variational auto-encoder (VAE). An LDM conditioned on a contrastive language-audio pretraining (CLAP) embedding is developed for VAE latent generation. By leveraging the audio-textaligned embedding space in CLAP, we remove the requirement for paired audio-text data during training LDM, as the condition for VAE latent generation can directly come from the audio itself. We demonstrate that training an LDM with audio only can be even better than training with audiotext data pairs. The proposed AudioLDM achieves leading TTA performance on the AudioCaps dataset with a Freshet distance (FD) of 23.31, outperforming the DiffSound baseline (FD of 47.68) by a large margin. Our system also enables zero-shot audio manipulations in the sampling process. In summary, our contributions are as follows:
· We demonstrate the first attempt to develop a continuous LDM for TTA generation. Our AudioLDM method outperforms existing methods in both subjective evaluation and objective metrics.
· We utilize CLAP embeddings to enable TTA generation

without using language-audio pairs to train LDMs. · We experimentally show that using audio only data in
LDM training can obtain a high-quality and computationally efficient TTA system. · We show that our proposed TTA system can perform text-guided audio styles manipulation, such as audio style transfer, super-resolution, and inpainting, without finetuning the model on a specific task.
2. Related Work
Text-to-Audio Generation has gained a lot of attention recently. Two works (Yang et al., 2022; Kreuk et al., 2022) explore how to learn audio representations in a discrete space given a natural language description, and then decode the representations to the audio waveform. Since both works require audio-text paired data for training the latent generation model, they have both proposed methods to address the issues of low quality and scarcity of paired data.
DiffSound (Yang et al., 2022) consists of a text encoder, a decoder, a vector-quantized variational autoencoder (VQVAE), and a vocoder. To alleviate the scarcity of audiotext paired data, they propose a mask-based text generation strategy (MBTG) for generating text descriptions from audio labels. For example, the label dog bark, a man speaking will be represented as [M] [M] dog bark [M] man speaking [M], where [M] represent the mask token. However, the text generated by MBTG still only includes the label information, which might potentially limit model performance.

2

