Adding Conditional Control to Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala Stanford University
{lvmin, anyirao, maneesh}@cs.stanford.edu

arXiv:2302.05543v3 [cs.CV] 26 Nov 2023

Input Canny edge

Default

"masterpiece of fairy tale, giant deer, golden antlers" "..., quaint city Galic"

Input human pose

Default

"chef in kitchen"

"Lincoln statue"

Figure 1: Controlling Stable Diffusion with learned conditions. ControlNet allows users to add conditions like Canny edges

(top), human pose (bottom), etc., to control the image generation of large pretrained diffusion models. The default results use

the prompt "a high-quality, detailed, and professional image". Users can optionally give prompts like the "chef in kitchen".

Abstract
We present ControlNet, a neural network architecture to add spatial conditioning controls to large, pretrained textto-image diffusion models. ControlNet locks the productionready large diffusion models, and reuses their deep and robust encoding layers pretrained with billions of images as a strong backbone to learn a diverse set of conditional controls. The neural architecture is connected with "zero convolutions" (zero-initialized convolution layers) that progressively grow the parameters from zero and ensure that no harmful noise could affect the finetuning. We test various conditioning controls, e.g., edges, depth, segmentation, human pose, etc., with Stable Diffusion, using single or multiple conditions, with or without prompts. We show that the training of ControlNets is robust with small (<50k) and large (>1m) datasets. Extensive results show that ControlNet may facilitate wider applications to control image diffusion models.

1. Introduction
Many of us have experienced flashes of visual inspiration that we wish to capture in a unique image. With the advent of text-to-image diffusion models [54, 62, 72], we can now create visually stunning images by typing in a text prompt. Yet, text-to-image models are limited in the control they provide over the spatial composition of the image; precisely expressing complex layouts, poses, shapes and forms can be difficult via text prompts alone. Generating an image that accurately matches our mental imagery often requires numerous trial-and-error cycles of editing a prompt, inspecting the resulting images and then re-editing the prompt.
Can we enable finer grained spatial control by letting users provide additional images that directly specify their desired image composition? In computer vision and machine learning, these additional images (e.g., edge maps, human pose skeletons, segmentation maps, depth, normals, etc.) are often treated as conditioning on the image generation process. Image-to-image translation models [34, 98] learn

the mapping from conditioning images to target images. The research community has also taken steps to control textto-image models with spatial masks [6, 20], image editing instructions [10], personalization via finetuning [21, 75], etc. While a few problems (e.g., generating image variations, inpainting) can be resolved with training-free techniques like constraining the denoising diffusion process or editing attention layer activations, a wider variety of problems like depth-to-image, pose-to-image, etc., require end-to-end learning and data-driven solutions.
Learning conditional controls for large text-to-image diffusion models in an end-to-end way is challenging. The amount of training data for a specific condition may be significantly smaller than the data available for general text-toimage training. For instance, the largest datasets for various specific problems (e.g., object shape/normal, human pose extraction, etc.) are usually about 100K in size, which is 50,000 times smaller than the LAION-5B [79] dataset that was used to train Stable Diffusion [82]. The direct finetuning or continued training of a large pretrained model with limited data may cause overfitting and catastrophic forgetting [31, 75]. Researchers have shown that such forgetting can be alleviated by restricting the number or rank of trainable parameters [14, 25, 31, 92]. For our problem, designing deeper or more customized neural architectures might be necessary for handling in-the-wild conditioning images with complex shapes and diverse high-level semantics.
This paper presents ControlNet, an end-to-end neural network architecture that learns conditional controls for large pretrained text-to-image diffusion models (Stable Diffusion in our implementation). ControlNet preserves the quality and capabilities of the large model by locking its parameters, and also making a trainable copy of its encoding layers. This architecture treats the large pretrained model as a strong backbone for learning diverse conditional controls. The trainable copy and the original, locked model are connected with zero convolution layers, with weights initialized to zeros so that they progressively grow during the training. This architecture ensures that harmful noise is not added to the deep features of the large diffusion model at the beginning of training, and protects the large-scale pretrained backbone in the trainable copy from being damaged by such noise.
Our experiments show that ControlNet can control Stable Diffusion with various conditioning inputs, including Canny edges, Hough lines, user scribbles, human key points, segmentation maps, shape normals, depths, etc. (Figure 1). We test our approach using a single conditioning image, with or without text prompts, and we demonstrate how our approach supports the composition of multiple conditions. Additionally, we report that the training of ControlNet is robust and scalable on datasets of different sizes, and that for some tasks like depth-to-image conditioning, training ControlNets on a single NVIDIA RTX 3090Ti GPU can achieve

results competitive with industrial models trained on large computation clusters. Finally, we conduct ablative studies to investigate the contribution of each component of our model, and compare our models to several strong conditional image generation baselines with user studies.
In summary, (1) we propose ControlNet, a neural network architecture that can add spatially localized input conditions to a pretrained text-to-image diffusion model via efficient finetuning, (2) we present pretrained ControlNets to control Stable Diffusion, conditioned on Canny edges, Hough lines, user scribbles, human key points, segmentation maps, shape normals, depths, and cartoon line drawings, and (3) we validate the method with ablative experiments comparing to several alternative architectures, and conduct user studies focused on several previous baselines across different tasks.
2. Related Work
2.1. Finetuning Neural Networks
One way to finetune a neural network is to directly continue training it with the additional training data. But this approach can lead to overfitting, mode collapse, and catastrophic forgetting. Extensive research has focused on developing finetuning strategies that avoid such issues.
HyperNetwork is an approach that originated in the Natural Language Processing (NLP) community [25], with the aim of training a small recurrent neural network to influence the weights of a larger one. It has been applied to image generation with generative adversarial networks (GANs) [4, 18]. Heathen et al. [26] and Kurumuz [43] implement HyperNetworks for Stable Diffusion [72] to change the artistic style of its output images.
Adapter methods are widely used in NLP for customizing a pretrained transformer model to other tasks by embedding new module layers into it [30, 84]. In computer vision, adapters are used for incremental learning [74] and domain adaptation [70]. This technique is often used with CLIP [66] for transferring pretrained backbone models to different tasks [23, 66, 85, 94]. More recently, adapters have yielded successful results in vision transformers [49, 50] and ViT-Adapter [14]. In concurrent work with ours, T2IAdapter [56] adapts Stable Diffusion to external conditions.
Additive Learning circumvents forgetting by freezing the original model weights and adding a small number of new parameters using learned weight masks [51, 74], pruning [52], or hard attention [80]. Side-Tuning [92] uses a side branch model to learn extra functionality by linearly blending the outputs of a frozen model and an added network, with a predefined blending weight schedule.
Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) prevents catastrophic forgetting [31] by learning the offset of parameters with lowrank matrices, based on the observation that many over-

