arXiv:1907.10830v4 [cs.CV] 8 Apr 2020

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
U-GAT-IT: UNSUPERVISED GENERATIVE ATTENTIONAL NETWORKS WITH ADAPTIVE LAYERINSTANCE NORMALIZATION FOR IMAGE-TO-IMAGE TRANSLATION
Junho Kim1,2, Minjae Kim2, Hyeonwoo Kang2, Kwanghee Lee3 1Clova AI Research, NAVER Corp, 2NCSOFT, 3Boeing Korea Engineering and Technology Center jhkim.ai@navercorp.com, {minjaekim, hwkang0131}@ncsoft.com, kwanghee.lee2@boeing.com
ABSTRACT
We propose a novel method for unsupervised image-to-image translation, which incorporates a new attention module and a new learnable normalization function in an end-to-end manner. The attention module guides our model to focus on more important regions distinguishing between source and target domains based on the attention map obtained by the auxiliary classifier. Unlike previous attention-based method which cannot handle the geometric changes between domains, our model can translate both images requiring holistic changes and images requiring large shape changes. Moreover, our new AdaLIN (Adaptive Layer-Instance Normalization) function helps our attention-guided model to flexibly control the amount of change in shape and texture by learned parameters depending on datasets. Experimental results show the superiority of the proposed method compared to the existing state-of-the-art models with a fixed network architecture and hyper-parameters. Our code and datasets are available at https://github.com/taki0112/UGATIT or https://github.com/znxlwm/UGATITpytorch.
1 INTRODUCTION
Image-to-image translation aims to learn a function that maps images within two different domains. This topic has gained a lot of attention from researchers in the fields of machine learning and computer vision because of its wide range of applications including image inpainting (Pathak et al. (2014); Iizuka et al. (2017)), super resolution (Dong et al. (2016); Kim et al. (2016)), colorization (Zhang et al. (2016; 2017)) and style transfer (Gatys et al. (2016); Huang & Belongie (2017)). When paired samples are given, the mapping model can be trained in a supervised manner using a conditional generative model (Isola et al. (2017); Li et al. (2017a); Wang et al. (2018)) or a simple regression model (Larsson et al. (2016); Long et al. (2015); Zhang et al. (2016)). In unsupervised settings where no paired data is available, multiple works (Anoosheh et al. (2018); Choi et al. (2018); Huang et al. (2018); Kim et al. (2017); Liu et al. (2017); Royer et al. (2017); Taigman et al. (2017); Yi et al. (2017); Zhu et al. (2017)) successfully have translated images using shared latent space (Liu et al. (2017)) and cycle consistency assumptions (Kim et al. (2017); Zhu et al. (2017)). These works have been further developed to handle the multi-modality of the task (Huang et al. (2018)).
Despite these advances, previous methods show performance differences depending on the amount of change in both shape and texture between domains. For example, they are successful for the style transfer tasks mapping local texture (e.g., photo2vangogh and photo2portrait) but are typically unsuccessful for image translation tasks with larger shape change (e.g., selfie2anime and cat2dog) in wild images. Therefore, the pre-processing steps such as image cropping and alignment are often required to avoid these problems by limiting the complexity of the data distributions (Huang et al. (2018); Liu et al. (2017)). In addition, existing methods such as DRIT (Lee et al. (2018)) cannot
Most work was done in NCSOFT. corresponding author
1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 1: The model architecture of U-GAT-IT. The detailed notations are described in Section Model
acquire the desired results for both image translation preserving the shape (e.g., horse2zebra) and image translation changing the shape (e.g., cat2dog) with the fixed network architecture and hyperparameters. The network structure or hyper-parameter setting needs to be adjusted for the specific dataset. In this work, we propose a novel method for unsupervised image-to-image translation, which incorporates a new attention module and a new learnable normalization function in an end-to-end manner. Our model guides the translation to focus on more important regions and ignore minor regions by distinguishing between source and target domains based on the attention map obtained by the auxiliary classifier. These attention maps are embedded into the generator and discriminator to focus on semantically important areas, thus facilitating the shape transformation. While the attention map in the generator induces the focus on areas that specifically distinguish between the two domains, the attention map in the discriminator helps fine-tuning by focusing on the difference between real image and fake image in target domain. In addition to the attentional mechanism, we have found that the choice of the normalization function has a significant impact on the quality of the transformed results for various datasets with different amounts of change in shape and texture. Inspired by Batch-Instance Normalization(BIN) (Nam & Kim (2018)), we propose Adaptive LayerInstance Normalization (AdaLIN), whose parameters are learned from datasets during training time by adaptively selecting a proper ratio between Instance normalization (IN) and Layer Normalization (LN). The AdaLIN function helps our attention-guided model to flexibly control the amount of change in shape and texture. As a result, our model, without modifying the model architecture or the hyper-parameters, can perform image translation tasks not only requiring holistic changes but also requiring large shape changes. In the experiments, we show the superiority of the proposed method compared to the existing state-of-the-art models on not only style transfer but also object transfiguration. The main contribution of the proposed work can be summarized as follows:
2

