arXiv:2207.12598v1 [cs.LG] 26 Jul 2022

CLASSIFIER-FREE DIFFUSION GUIDANCE
Jonathan Ho & Tim Salimans Google Research, Brain team {jonathanho,salimans}@google.com
ABSTRACT
Classifier guidance is a recently introduced method to trade off mode coverage and sample fidelity in conditional diffusion models post training, in the same spirit as low temperature sampling or truncation in other types of generative models. Classifier guidance combines the score estimate of a diffusion model with the gradient of an image classifier and thereby requires training an image classifier separate from the diffusion model. It also raises the question of whether guidance can be performed without a classifier. We show that guidance can be indeed performed by a pure generative model without such a classifier: in what we call classifier-free guidance, we jointly train a conditional and an unconditional diffusion model, and we combine the resulting conditional and unconditional score estimates to attain a trade-off between sample quality and diversity similar to that obtained using classifier guidance.
1 INTRODUCTION
Diffusion models have recently emerged as an expressive and flexible family of generative models, delivering competitive sample quality and likelihood scores on image and audio synthesis tasks (SohlDickstein et al., 2015; Song & Ermon, 2019; Ho et al., 2020; Song et al., 2021b; Kingma et al., 2021; Song et al., 2021a). These models have delivered audio synthesis performance rivaling the quality of autoregressive models with substantially fewer inference steps (Chen et al., 2021; Kong et al., 2021), and they have delivered ImageNet generation results outperforming BigGAN-deep (Brock et al., 2019) and VQ-VAE-2 (Razavi et al., 2019) in terms of FID score and classification accuracy score (Ho et al., 2021; Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). Dhariwal & Nichol (2021) proposed classifier guidance, a technique to boost the sample quality of a diffusion model using an extra trained classifier. Prior to classifier guidance, it was not known how to generate "low temperature" samples from a diffusion model similar to those produced by truncated BigGAN (Brock et al., 2019) or low temperature Glow (Kingma & Dhariwal, 2018): naive attempts, such as scaling the model score vectors or decreasing the amount of Gaussian noise added during diffusion sampling, are ineffective (Dhariwal & Nichol, 2021). Classifier guidance instead mixes a diffusion model's score estimate with the input gradient of the log probability of a
Figure 1: Classifier-free guidance on the malamute class for a 64x64 ImageNet diffusion model. Left to right: increasing amounts of classifier-free guidance, starting from non-guided samples on the left.
A short version of this paper appeared in the NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=qw8AKxfYbI
1

Figure 2: The effect of guidance on a mixture of three Gaussians, each mixture component representing data conditioned on a class. The leftmost plot is the non-guided marginal density. Left to right are densities of mixtures of normalized guided conditionals with increasing guidance strength.

classifier. By varying the strength of the classifier gradient, Dhariwal & Nichol can trade off Inception score (Salimans et al., 2016) and FID score (Heusel et al., 2017) (or precision and recall) in a manner similar to varying the truncation parameter of BigGAN.
We are interested in whether classifier guidance can be performed without a classifier. Classifier guidance complicates the diffusion model training pipeline because it requires training an extra classifier, and this classifier must be trained on noisy data so it is generally not possible to plug in a pre-trained classifier. Furthermore, because classifier guidance mixes a score estimate with a classifier gradient during sampling, classifier-guided diffusion sampling can be interpreted as attempting to confuse an image classifier with a gradient-based adversarial attack. This raises the question of whether classifier guidance is successful at boosting classifier-based metrics such as FID and Inception score (IS) simply because it is adversarial against such classifiers. Stepping in direction of classifier gradients also bears some resemblance to GAN training, particularly with nonparameteric generators; this also raises the question of whether classifier-guided diffusion models perform well on classifier-based metrics because they are beginning to resemble GANs, which are already known to perform well on such metrics.
To resolve these questions, we present classifier-free guidance, our guidance method which avoids any classifier entirely. Rather than sampling in the direction of the gradient of an image classifier, classifier-free guidance instead mixes the score estimates of a conditional diffusion model and a jointly trained unconditional diffusion model. By sweeping over the mixing weight, we attain a FID/IS tradeoff similar to that attained by classifier guidance. Our classifier-free guidance results demonstrate that pure generative diffusion models are capable of synthesizing extremely high fidelity samples possible with other types of generative models.

2 BACKGROUND

We train diffusion models in continuous time (Song et al., 2021b; Chen et al., 2021; Kingma et al., 2021): letting x  p(x) and z = {z |   [min, max]} for hyperparameters min < max  R, the forward process q(z|x) is the variance-preserving Markov process (Sohl-Dickstein et al., 2015):

q(z|x) = N (x, 2I), where 2 = 1/(1 + e-), 2 = 1 - 2

(1)

q(z|z ) = N ((/ )z , 2| I), where  <  , 2| = (1 - e- )2

(2)

We will use the notation p(z) (or p(z)) to denote the marginal of z (or z) when x  p(x) and z  q(z|x). Note that  = log 2 /2, so  can be interpreted as the log signal-to-noise ratio of z, and the forward process runs in the direction of decreasing .

Conditioned on x, the forward process can be described in reverse by the transitions q(z |z, x) = N (µ~  |(z, x), ~2 |I), where

µ~  |(z, x) = e- ( /)z + (1 - e- ) x, ~2 | = (1 - e- )2

(3)

The reverse process generative model starts from p(zmin ) = N (0, I). We specify the transitions:

p(z |z) = N (µ~  |(z, x(z)), (~2 |)1-v(2| )v)

(4)

2

