Extended Version of accepted CVPR 2022 Paper
RePaint: Inpainting using Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
Andreas Lugmayr Martin Danelljan Andres Romero Fisher Yu Radu Timofte Luc Van Gool Computer Vision Lab
ETH Zu¨rich, Switzerland

arXiv:2201.09865v4 [cs.CV] 31 Aug 2022

Input

Denoising 0% Denoising 60% Denoising 75%

Sample 1

Sample 2

Sample 3

Sample 4

Sample 5

Figure 1. We use Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) for inpainting. The process is conditioned on the masked input (left). It starts from a random Gaussian noise sample that is iteratively denoised until it produces a high-quality output. Since this process is stochastic, we can sample multiple diverse outputs. The DDPM prior forces a harmonized image, is able to reproduce texture from other regions, and inpaint semantically meaningful content.

Abstract
Free-form inpainting is the task of adding new content to an image in the regions specified by an arbitrary binary mask. Most existing approaches train for a certain distribution of masks, which limits their generalization capabilities to unseen mask types. Furthermore, training with pixel-wise and perceptual losses often leads to simple textural extensions towards the missing areas instead of semantically meaningful generation. In this work, we propose RePaint: A Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model (DDPM) based inpainting approach that is applicable to even extreme masks. We employ a pretrained unconditional DDPM as the generative prior. To condition the generation process, we only alter the reverse diffusion iterations by

sampling the unmasked regions using the given image information. Since this technique does not modify or condition the original DDPM network itself, the model produces highquality and diverse output images for any inpainting form. We validate our method for both faces and general-purpose image inpainting using standard and extreme masks. RePaint outperforms state-of-the-art Autoregressive, and GAN approaches for at least five out of six mask distributions. Github Repository: git.io/RePaint
1. Introduction
Image Inpainting, also known as Image Completion, aims at filling missing regions within an image. Such inpainted regions need to harmonize with the rest of the im-

1

Extended Version of accepted CVPR 2022 Paper

age and be semantically reasonable. Inpainting approaches thus require strong generative capabilities. To this end, current State-of-the-Art approaches [20, 40, 48, 51] rely on GANs [8] or Autoregressive Modeling [33, 42, 49]. Moreover, inpainting methods need to handle various forms of masks such as thin or thick brushes, squares, or even extreme masks where the vast majority of the image is missing. This is highly challenging since existing approaches train with a certain mask distribution, which can lead to poor generalization to novel mask types. In this work, we investigate an alternative generative approach for inpainting, aiming to design an approach that requires no maskspecific training.
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) is an emerging alternative paradigm for generative modelling [12, 38]. Recently, Dhariwal and Nichol [7] demonstrated that DDPM can even outperform the state-of-the-art GAN-based method [4] for image synthesis. In essence, the DDPM is trained to iteratively denoise the image by reversing a diffusion process. Starting from randomly sampled noise, the DDPM is then iteratively applied for a certain number of steps, which yields the final image sample. While founded in principled probabilistic modeling, DDPMs have been shown to generate diverse and highquality images [7, 12, 28].
We propose RePaint: an inpainting method that solely leverages an off-the-shelf unconditionally trained DDPM. Specifically, instead of learning a mask-conditional generative model, we condition the generation process by sampling from the given pixels during the reverse diffusion iterations. Remarkably, our model is therefore not trained for the inpainting task itself. This has two important advantages. First, it allows our network to generalize to any mask during inference. Second, it enables our network to learn more semantic generation capabilities since it has a powerful DDPM image synthesis prior (Figure 1).
Although the standard DDPM sampling strategy produces matching textures, the inpainting is often semantically incorrect. Therefore, we introduce an improved denoising strategy that resamples (RePaint) iterations to better condition the image. Notably, instead of slowing down the diffusion process [7], our approach goes forward and backward in diffusion time, producing remarkable semantically meaningful images. Our approach allows the network to effectively harmonize the generated image information during the entire inference process, leading to a more effective conditioning on the given image information.
We perform experiments on CelebA-HQ [21] and ImageNet [36], and compare with other State-of-the-Art inpainting approaches. Our approach generalizes better and has overall more semantically meaningful inpainted regions.

2. Related Work
Early attempts on Image Inpainting or Image Completion exploited low-level cues within the input image [1­3], or within the neighbor of a large image dataset [10] to fill the missing region.
Deterministic Image Inpainting: Since the introduction of GANs [8], most of the existing methods follow a standard configuration, first proposed by Pathak et al. [32], that is, using an encoder-decoder architecture as the main inpainting generator, adversarial training, and tailored losses that aim at photo-realism. Follow-up works have produced impressive results in recent years [15, 20, 30, 34, 50].
As image inpainting requires a high-level semantic context, and to explicitly include it in the generation pipeline, there exist hand-crafted architectural designs such as Dilated Convolutions [16, 45] to increase the receptive field, Partial Convolutions [19] and Gated Convolutions [48] to guide the convolution kernel according to the inpainted mask, Contextual Attention [46] to leverage on global information, Edges maps [9, 27, 43, 44] or Semantic Segmentation maps [14, 31] to further guide the generation, and Fourier Convolutions [40] to include both global and local information efficiently. Although recent works produce photo-realistic results, GANs are well known for textural synthesis, so these methods shine on background completion or removing objects, which require repetitive structural synthesis, and struggle with semantic synthesis (Figure 5).
Diverse Image Inpainting: Most GAN-based Image Inpainting methods are prone to deterministic transformations due to the lack of control during the image synthesis. To overcome this issue, Zheng et al. [55] and Zhao et al. [53] propose a VAE-based network that trade-offs between diversity and reconstruction. Zhao et al. [54], inspired by the StyleGAN2 [18] modulated convolutions, introduces a comodulation layer for the inpainting task in order to improve both diversity and reconstruction. A new family of autoregressive methods [33, 42, 49], which can handle irregular masks, has recently emerged as a powerful alternative for free-form image inpainting.
Usage of Image Prior: In a different direction closer to ours Richardson et al. [35] exploits the StyleGAN [17] prior to successfully inpaint missing regions. However, similar to super-resolution methods [5, 26] that leverage the StyleGAN latent space, it is to limited specific scenarios like faces. Noteworthy, a Ulyanov et al. [41] showed that the structure of a non-trained generator network contains an inherent prior that can be used for inpaining and other applications. In contrast to these methods, we are leveraging on the high expressiveness of a pretrained Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model [12] (DDPM) and therefore use it as a prior for generic image inpainting. Our method generates very detailed, high-quality images for both seman-

2

