arXiv:1807.03039v2 [stat.ML] 10 Jul 2018

Glow: Generative Flow with Invertible 1×1 Convolutions
Diederik P. Kingma*, Prafulla Dhariwal OpenAI, San Francisco
Abstract
Flow-based generative models (Dinh et al., 2014) are conceptually attractive due to tractability of the exact log-likelihood, tractability of exact latent-variable inference, and parallelizability of both training and synthesis. In this paper we propose Glow, a simple type of generative flow using an invertible 1 × 1 convolution. Using our method we demonstrate a significant improvement in log-likelihood on standard benchmarks. Perhaps most strikingly, we demonstrate that a generative model optimized towards the plain log-likelihood objective is capable of efficient realisticlooking synthesis and manipulation of large images. The code for our model is available at https://github.com/openai/glow.
1 Introduction
Two major unsolved problems in the field of machine learning are (1) data-efficiency: the ability to learn from few datapoints, like humans; and (2) generalization: robustness to changes of the task or its context. AI systems, for example, often do not work at all when given inputs that are different from their training distribution. A promise of generative models, a major branch of machine learning,
Equal contribution. Preprint. Work in progress.
Figure 1: Synthetic celebrities sampled from our model; see Section 3 for architecture and method, and Section 5 for more results.

is to overcome these limitations by: (1) learning realistic world models, potentially allowing agents to plan in a world model before actual interaction with the world, and (2) learning meaningful features of the input while requiring little or no human supervision or labeling. Since such features can be learned from large unlabeled datasets and are not necessarily task-specific, downstream solutions based on those features could potentially be more robust and more data efficient. In this paper we work towards this ultimate vision, in addition to intermediate applications, by aiming to improve upon the state-of-the-art of generative models.
Generative modeling is generally concerned with the extremely challenging task of modeling all dependencies within very high-dimensional input data, usually specified in the form of a full joint probability distribution. Since such joint models potentially capture all patterns that are present in the data, the applications of accurate generative models are near endless. Immediate applications are as diverse as speech synthesis, text analysis, semi-supervised learning and model-based control; see Section 4 for references.
The discipline of generative modeling has experienced enormous leaps in capabilities in recent years, mostly with likelihood-based methods (Graves, 2013; Kingma and Welling, 2013, 2018; Dinh et al., 2014; van den Oord et al., 2016a) and generative adversarial networks (GANs) (Goodfellow et al., 2014) (see Section 4). Likelihood-based methods can be divided into three categories:
1. Autoregressive models (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997; Graves, 2013; van den Oord et al., 2016a,b; Van Den Oord et al., 2016). Those have the advantage of simplicity, but have as disadvantage that synthesis has limited parallelizability, since the computational length of synthesis is proportional to the dimensionality of the data; this is especially troublesome for large images or video.
2. Variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma and Welling, 2013, 2018), which optimize a lower bound on the log-likelihood of the data. Variational autoencoders have the advantage of parallelizability of training and synthesis, but can be comparatively challenging to optimize (Kingma et al., 2016).
3. Flow-based generative models, first described in NICE (Dinh et al., 2014) and extended in RealNVP (Dinh et al., 2016). We explain the key ideas behind this class of model in the following sections.
Flow-based generative models have so far gained little attention in the research community compared to GANs (Goodfellow et al., 2014) and VAEs (Kingma and Welling, 2013). Some of the merits of flow-based generative models include:
· Exact latent-variable inference and log-likelihood evaluation. In VAEs, one is able to infer only approximately the value of the latent variables that correspond to a datapoint. GAN's have no encoder at all to infer the latents. In reversible generative models, this can be done exactly without approximation. Not only does this lead to accurate inference, it also enables optimization of the exact log-likelihood of the data, instead of a lower bound of it.
· Efficient inference and efficient synthesis. Autoregressive models, such as the PixelCNN (van den Oord et al., 2016b), are also reversible, however synthesis from such models is difficult to parallelize, and typically inefficient on parallel hardware. Flow-based generative models like Glow (and RealNVP) are efficient to parallelize for both inference and synthesis.
· Useful latent space for downstream tasks. The hidden layers of autoregressive models have unknown marginal distributions, making it much more difficult to perform valid manipulation of data. In GANs, datapoints can usually not be directly represented in a latent space, as they have no encoder and might not have full support over the data distribution. (Grover et al., 2018). This is not the case for reversible generative models and VAEs, which allow for various applications such as interpolations between datapoints and meaningful modifications of existing datapoints.
· Significant potential for memory savings. Computing gradients in reversible neural networks requires an amount of memory that is constant instead of linear in their depth, as explained in the RevNet paper (Gomez et al., 2017).
2

