Efficient Transformers: A Survey

arXiv:2009.06732v3 [cs.LG] 14 Mar 2022

Efficient Transformers: A Survey

Yi Tay Google Research
Mostafa Dehghani Google Research, Brain team
Dara Bahri Google Research
Donald Metzler Google Research

yitay@google.com dehghani@google.com
dbahri@google.com metzler@google.com

Editor: Preprint, Version 2, Updated Mar 2022

Abstract
Transformer model architectures have garnered immense interest lately due to their effectiveness across a range of domains like language, vision and reinforcement learning. In the field of natural language processing for example, Transformers have become an indispensable staple in the modern deep learning stack. Recently, a dizzying number of "X-former" models have been proposed - Reformer, Linformer, Performer, Longformer, to name a few - which improve upon the original Transformer architecture, many of which make improvements around computational and memory efficiency. With the aim of helping the avid researcher navigate this flurry, this paper characterizes a large and thoughtful selection of recent efficiency-flavored "X-former" models, providing an organized and comprehensive overview of existing work and models across multiple domains. Keywords: Deep Learning, Natural Language Processing, Transformer Models, Attention Models, Neural Networks
1. Introduction
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017) are a formidable force in the modern deep learning stack. Transformers are pervasive and have made tremendous impact in many fields such as language understanding (Devlin et al., 2018; Brown et al., 2020; Raffel et al., 2019) and image processing (Parmar et al., 2018; Carion et al., 2020). As such, it is only natural that a wealth of research has been dedicated to making fundamental improvements to the model over the past few years (Dehghani et al., 2018; So et al., 2019; Ahmed et al., 2017). This immense interest has also spurred research into more efficient variants of the model (Kitaev et al., 2020; Roy et al., 2020; Beltagy et al., 2020; Katharopoulos et al., 2020; Tay et al., 2020b; Wang et al., 2020c; Rae et al., 2020; Choromanski et al., 2020b; Dai et al., 2020; Correia et al., 2019; Sukhbaatar et al., 2019a; Vyas et al., 2020).
There has been such a surge of Transformer model variants proposed recently, that researchers and practitioners alike may find it challenging to keep pace with the rate of innovation. As of this writing and this manuscript's first draft (circa August 2020), there have been nearly a dozen new efficiency-focused models proposed in just the past 6 months.
1

Efficient Transformers: A Survey
Thus, a survey of the existing literature is both beneficial for the community and quite timely.
The self-attention mechanism is a key defining characteristic of Transformer models. The mechanism can be viewed as a graph-like inductive bias that connects all tokens in a sequence with a relevance-based pooling operation. A well-known concern with selfattention is the quadratic time and memory complexity, which can hinder model scalability in many settings. There has been an overwhelming influx of model variants proposed recently that address this problem. We hereinafter name this class of models "efficient Transformers".
The efficiency of a model can be interpreted in a variety of ways. It might refer to the memory footprint of the model, which is of importance when the memory of accelerators on which the model is running is limited. Efficiency might also refer to computational costs, e.g. the number of FLOPs, both during training and inference. In particular, for on-device applications, models often must operate within a highly constrained computational budget. Throughout this survey, we refer to the efficiency of Transformers both in terms of memory and computation. We are especially interested in how such models perform when they are applied to large inputs.
Efficient self-attention models are crucial in applications that model long sequences. For example, documents, images, and videos are all often composed of a relatively large number of pixels or tokens. Efficiency in processing long sequences is therefore paramount for widespread adoption of Transformers.
This survey sets out to provide a comprehensive overview of the recent advances made in this class of models. We are primarily interested in modeling advances and architectural innovations that improve the general efficiency of Transformers, including but not limited to tackling the quadratic complexity issue of the self-attention mechanism or reducing the computation costs by means such as pooling and/or sparsity. We also briefly discuss general improvements and other efficiency improvements such as parameter sharing.
We propose a taxonomy of efficient Transformer models, characterizing them by their technical innovation and primary use case. Specifically, we review Transformer models that have applications in both language and vision domains, attempting to consolidate the literature across the spectrum. We also provide a detailed walk-through of many of these models and draw connections between them.
Author notes on the updated version (December 2021) This manuscript went through a round of revision in December 2021 (approximately a year and 4 months later after the first manuscript was written). The main changes involve adding our discussions to better reflect the state of research at this current point of time (new models, new paradigms) and also accurately reflect the current meta trends surrounding this research area. A retrospective section is posed near the end of the paper. See Appendix for a meaningful change log of what has happened as we transitioned to V2 of this survey.
Author notes on the updated version (March 2022) We wanted to post the update to arxiv in Jan but forgot about it. We lightly revised it again in Mar by adding newer SOTA sparse models such as ST-MoE-32B (Zoph et al., 2022).
2

