arXiv:2206.01861v1 [cs.CL] 4 Jun 2022

ZeroQuant: Efficient and Affordable Post-Training Quantization for Large-Scale Transformers
Zhewei Yao, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Minjia Zhang Xiaoxia Wu, Conglong Li, Yuxiong He
Microsoft
{zheweiyao, yazdani.reza, minjiaz, xiaoxiawu, conglong.li, yuxhe}@microsoft.com
Abstract
How to efficiently serve ever-larger trained natural language models in practice has become exceptionally challenging even for powerful cloud servers due to their prohibitive memory/computation requirements. In this work, we present an efficient and affordable post-training quantization approach to compress large Transformer-based models, termed as ZeroQuant. ZeroQuant is an end-to-end quantization and inference pipeline with three main components: (1) a fine-grained hardware-friendly quantization scheme for both weight and activations; (2) a novel affordable layer-by-layer knowledge distillation algorithm (LKD) even without the access to the original training data; (3) a highly-optimized quantization system backend support to remove the quantization/dequantization overhead. As such, we are able to show that: (1) ZeroQuant can reduce the precision for weights and activations to INT8 in a cost-free way for both BERT and GPT-3-style models with minimal accuracy impact, which leads to up to 5.19x/4.16x speedup on those models compared to FP16 inference; (2) ZeroQuant plus LKD affordably quantize the weights in the fully-connected module to INT4 along with INT8 weights in the attention module and INT8 activations, resulting in 3x memory footprint reduction compared to the FP16 model; (3) ZeroQuant can be directly applied to two of the largest open-sourced language models, including GPT-J6B and GPT-NeoX20B, for which our INT8 model achieves similar accuracy as the FP16 model but achieves up to 5.2x better efficiency.
1 Introduction
Large-scale natural language models have been widely adopted in different applications, e.g., natural language understanding using BERT [63] and generation tasks using GPT-style models [48]. Although those models have achieved cutting-edge accuracy results, as the model size keeps increasing dramatically, the requirements of memory footprint and the computational cost to deploy them become a major bottleneck, even on cloud servers with powerful GPU devices.
One promising way to alleviate this challenge is quantization, which can reduce the bit precision for both weight and activations for lower memory footprint and faster compute (e.g., INT8 Tensor cores on T4/A100). However, quantization usually requires retraining (also known as quantization aware training, or QAT in short) to recover the accuracy degradation from representation loss of weight and activations. To enable QAT, the full training pipeline is usually required, including the training data and compute resources, to finetune the model. Access to those components is now oftentimes not available, and QAT is also a time-consuming process, particularly for those large-scale models.
Recently, zero-shot quantization [9, 46] and post-training quantization (PTQ) [45, 38] are proposed to address the training-data access and compute requirement challenges since PTQ generally requires no (or minimal) retraining. But most of those works primarily focus on computer vision problems on relatively
Code will be released soon as a part of https://github.com/microsoft/DeepSpeed
1

small scales. More recently, [6] shows promising PTQ results on BERT. However, (1) its main focus is on high-precision quantization (INT8/FP16) on BERTbase, (2) it does not consider other billion-scale generative models (GPT-3-style models [8]). More importantly, most of these works do not report real latency improvement, putting the usefulness of these methods in improving inference latency into question. For example, existing work often do not discuss the quantization/dequantization cost associated with different quantization schemes, which in fact has a big impact to the performance benefit of using low precision.
Besides, for extreme quantization (e.g., INT4), knowledge distillation is usually used to boost performance, which adds another source of expensive computation cost as compared to QAT. Furthermore, in order to achieve better accuracy performance, hidden-states knowledge distillation, e.g., [2, 79], is usually applied for the quantized model. This would put significant pressure on the GPU memory and the compute resource requirement since both the teacher and student models needed to be loaded into the GPU memory for training.
In this paper, we present ZeroQuant, an end-to-end post-training quantization and inference pipeline, to address those challenges, targeting both INT8 and INT4/INT8 mixed-precision quantization. Specifically, our contributions are: · We apply fine-grained hardware-friendly quantization schemes on both weight and activations, i.e., group-
wise quantization for weight and token-wise quantization for activations. Both quantization schemes can significantly reduce the quantization error and retain hardware acceleration properties. · We propose a novel layer-by-layer knowledge distillation method (LKD) for INT4/INT8 mixed-precision quantization, where the neural network is quantized layer-by-layer through distillation with minimal iterations and even without the access to the original training data. As such, at any given moment, the device memory is primarily populated only with a single extra layer's footprint, making billion-scale model distillation feasible with limited training budget and GPU devices. · We develop a highly optimized inference backend, which eliminates the expensive computation cost of quantization/dequantization operators, enabling latency speedups on INT8 Tensor cores on modern GPU hardware. · Our empirical results show that: ­ ZeroQuant enables quantizing BERT and GPT-3-style models into INT8 weight and activations to retain
accuracy without incurring any retraining cost. Compared to FP16 inference, our INT8 model achieves up to 5.19x/4.16x speedup on BERTbase/GPT-3350M on A100 GPUs. ­ ZeroQuant plus LKD can do INT4/INT8 mixed-precision quantization for BERT and GPT-3-style models. This results in a 3x memory footprint reduction with marginal accuracy loss as compared to the FP16 model. Also, thanks to the lightweight of LKD, we can finish the quantization process in 33s (10 minutes) for BERTbase (BERTlarge). We also demonstrate that LKD can use other datasets to achieve similar performance to the original training data. ­ We demonstrate the scalability of ZeroQuant on two of the largest open-sourced language models, i.e, GPT-J6B and GPT-NeoX20B, with INT8 quantization. ZeroQuant can achieve 3.67x speedup over the FP16 model for GPT-J6B and (2) reduce the GPU requirement for inference from 2 to 1 and latency from 65ms to 25ms for GPT-NeoX20B (i.e., 5.2x better system efficiency in total).
2 Related Work
Model compression has been explored from different aspects [25, 37, 39, 34, 43, 20, 24, 50, 18, 74, 40, 26, 55, 59, 28, 60, 68, 33, 14, 38, 31]. Among those, quantization is one of the most promising directions as it directly reduces the memory footprint and compute intensity. Here, we focus on quantization for NLP models and briefly discuss the related work.
The majority of quantization works can be categorized into quantization-aware training (QAT). [56, 76] are the first few works to quantize BERT models using integer numbers for both weight and activations. Particularly, [56] utilizes Hessian information to push the weight bit-precision to even INT2/INT4, and it also proposes group-wise quantization to quantize the weight matrix in a more fine-grained granularity compared to single matrix quantization. [21] introduces quantization noise to alleviate the variations of QAT. [79, 2]
2

