arXiv:2310.07641v2 [cs.CL] 16 Apr 2024

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
EVALUATING LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS AT EVALUATING INSTRUCTION FOLLOWING
Zhiyuan Zeng1, Jiatong Yu2, Tianyu Gao2, Yu Meng3, Tanya Goyal2, Danqi Chen2 1Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University 2Princeton Language and Intelligence (PLI), Princeton University 3Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign zengzy20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {jiatongy,tianyug,tanyagoyal,danqic}@princeton.edu yumeng5@illinois.edu
ABSTRACT
As research in large language models (LLMs) continues to accelerate, LLM-based evaluation has emerged as a scalable and cost-effective alternative to human evaluations for comparing the ever increasing list of models. This paper investigates the efficacy of these "LLM evaluators", particularly in using them to assess instruction following, a metric that gauges how closely generated text adheres to the given instruction. We introduce a challenging meta-evaluation benchmark, LLMBAR, designed to test the ability of an LLM evaluator in discerning instructionfollowing outputs. The authors manually curated 419 pairs of outputs, one adhering to instructions while the other diverging, yet may possess deceptive qualities that mislead an LLM evaluator, e.g., a more engaging tone. Contrary to existing meta-evaluation, we discover that different evaluators (i.e., combinations of LLMs and prompts) exhibit distinct performance on LLMBAR and even the highestscoring ones have substantial room for improvement. We also present a novel suite of prompting strategies that further close the gap between LLM and human evaluators. With LLMBAR, we hope to offer more insight into LLM evaluators and foster future research in developing better instruction-following models. 1
1 INTRODUCTION
The recent success of LLM-based chat assistants has spurred countless research efforts in both academia and industry, with new models being released at an astonishing rate. While conventional benchmarks measure the underlying ability of those models in commonsense and world knowledge (Gao et al., 2021; Srivastava et al., 2022; Hendrycks et al., 2021), human evaluation remains the gold standard for testing conversational abilities due to the open-ended nature of the task. However, this is neither scalable nor reproducible (Karpinska et al., 2021). Consequently, LLM evaluators have emerged as a cost-effective alternative for obtaining preference judgments between outputs from different models (Chiang & Lee, 2023; Dubois et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023b).
Operationally, an LLM evaluator is a combination of a strong base LLM (OpenAI, 2022; 2023; Anthropic, 2023) and its prompting strategy (Wei et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2023). They are usually given one instruction and corresponding outputs from two models, and asked to choose a preferred one. It remains an open question whether we can rely on those LLM evaluators and which ones to use. This highlights the need for a good meta-evaluation benchmark (consisting of instructions and output pairs associated with human judgments) so that we can evaluate to what extent different LLM evaluators agree with human preferences and choose evaluators in an informed manner.
How should we construct a good meta-evaluation benchmark? Prior work has primarily used randomly-sampled output pairs and crowdsourced annotators to construct meta-evaluation benchmarks to assess LLM evaluators (Dubois et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b). However, we argue this strategy overlooks one important factor: inherent subjectivity of human preferences. Consider the top example in Figure 1: despite the quality difference being in-
1Our data and code are available at https://github.com/princeton-nlp/LLMBar.
1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Previous Work
Instruction: What is a bomb?
Dispreferred Output A bomb is a destructive device filled with an explosive material designed to cause destruction or damage.

Preferred Output A bomb is an explosive device which can cause an intense release of heat, light, sound, and fragments, intended to cause harm to people or destroy property. Bombs may contain . . .

LLMBar
Instruction: Sort the following list into alphabetical order. apple, banana, orange, grape. Dispreferred Output No problem! Here's the sorted list. Grape, apple, banana, orange.

Preferred Output apple, banana, grape, orange.

Figure 1: Comparison of instances from previous work and our proposed meta-evaluation benchmark LLMBAR. LLMBAR curates output pairs that have objective preferences. The dispreferred output in LLMBAR often adopts appealing superficial qualities that challenge LLM evaluators.
discernible, the dataset still provides a preference label possibly reflecting a personal preference for a longer length. This issue is also demonstrated by the low agreements between human annotators reported in AlpacaFarm (66%; Dubois et al., 2023) and MT-Bench (63%; Zheng et al., 2023), against a random baseline of 50%. When selecting LLM evaluators based on such a low human agreement, we cannot guarantee that the chosen evaluators can reliably evaluate objective and arguably more crucial properties of the outputs, such as instruction following and factual correctness.
In this work, we create a meta-evaluation benchmark for assessing LLM evaluators on one such objective criterion, namely instruction following. We define it as the ability to correctly parse openended instructions and adhere to the specified requirements. This criterion relates to other desirable LLM properties, such as helpfulness (Askell et al., 2021). Furthermore, unlike attributes that can be easily acquired through imitation learning, such as engaging tones (Gudibande et al., 2023), even the strongest LLMs today struggle with following instructions (Wu et al., 2023b; Li et al., 2023c). Figure 1 (bottom) shows an example of instruction following vs. superficial quality. While the right output adheres to the instruction, both LLM evaluators and humans are often biased towards the left one due to its more engaging tone. If we do not rigorously analyze the capability of LLM evaluators to distinguish between the true ability of instruction following and superficial clues, there is a risk of advancing models that excel in mimicking effective assistants rather than executing desired tasks.
We introduce LLMBAR, a manually curated meta-evaluation benchmark designed to test whether LLM evaluators can detect instruction-following outputs. LLMBAR consists of 419 instances, where each entry consists of an instruction paired with two outputs: one faithfully and correctly follows the instruction and the other deviates from it. The evaluation aims to gauge whether the LLM evaluators concur with our annotated correct choice and hence pass the "bar". LLMBAR departs from existing meta-evaluation (Dubois et al., 2023; Chiang & Lee, 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Zheng et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023) in the following aspects:
· All the instances are examined by the authors to guarantee their quality.
· LLMBAR focuses exclusively on the instruction-following quality and enforces objective preferences. As a result, LLMBAR has an expert annotator agreement rate of 94%, significantly higher than any of those previous benchmarks.
· LLMBAR provides both a NATURAL set and an ADVERSARIAL set. The NATURAL set collects and filters preference data from existing benchmarks, aiming to gauge evaluator performance in real-world distributions. Conversely, the ADVERSARIAL set comprises adversarially crafted instances that tend to confound less adept evaluators.
We assess the performance of five LLMs--GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022), LLaMA-2-Chat (Touvron et al., 2023b), PaLM2 (Anil et al., 2023), and Falcon (Almazrouei et al., 2023)--paired with various prompting strategies as evaluators. Notably, different LLM evaluators demonstrate distinct performance on LLMBAR, contrary to previous findings (Zheng et al., 2023; Chan et al., 2023). For example, on the ADVERSARIAL set, ChatGPT-based, LLaMA-2-Chat-based, and Falcon-based evaluators show worse-than-chance performance; even the best-performing GPT4-based evaluator has a significant gap from expert human annotators. Leveraging insights from LLMBAR, we propose a suite of novel prompting strategies and show that a combination of them significantly improves evaluators in detecting instruction following. Notably, the best strategy leads to a 10% boost for GPT-4-based evaluators on the ADVERSARIAL set.

2

