Fluctuation-based Adaptive Structured Pruning for Large Language Models
Yongqi An1, 2, Xu Zhao1, 4, *, Tao Yu1, 2, Ming Tang1, 2, Jinqiao Wang1, 2, 3, 4
1Foundation Model Research Center, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 2School of artificial intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China 3Wuhan AI Research, Wuhan, China 4Objecteye Inc., Beijing, China {yongqi.an, xu.zhao, tangm, jqwang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn yutao2022@ia.ac.cn

arXiv:2312.11983v1 [cs.CL] 19 Dec 2023

Abstract
Network Pruning is a promising way to address the huge computing resource demands of the deployment and inference of Large Language Models (LLMs). Retraining-free is important for LLMs' pruning methods. However, almost all of the existing retraining-free pruning approaches for LLMs focus on unstructured pruning, which requires specific hardware support for acceleration. In this paper, we propose a novel retraining-free structured pruning framework for LLMs, named FLAP (FLuctuation-based Adaptive Structured Pruning). It is hardware-friendly by effectively reducing storage and enhancing inference speed. For effective structured pruning of LLMs, we highlight three critical elements that demand the utmost attention: formulating structured importance metrics, adaptively searching the global compressed model, and implementing compensation mechanisms to mitigate performance loss. First, FLAP determines whether the output feature map is easily recoverable when a column of weight is removed, based on the fluctuation pruning metric. Then it standardizes the importance scores to adaptively determine the global compressed model structure. At last, FLAP adds additional bias terms to recover the output feature maps using the baseline values. We thoroughly evaluate our approach on a variety of language benchmarks. Without any retraining, our method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods, including LLM-Pruner and the extension of Wanda in structured pruning. The code is released at https://github.com/CASIA-IVA-Lab/FLAP.
Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) (Brown et al. 2020; Touvron et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2022; Scao et al. 2022) have recently achieved outstanding performance across various language benchmarks in NLP (Bommarito and Katz 2022; Bubeck et al. 2023; Wei et al. 2022), spurring a large number of open-source applications (Taori et al. 2023; Anand et al. 2023; Richards 2023). These remarkable capabilities typically come with a huge-scale model size with high inference costs. This makes it harder for more people to benefit from LLMs. Due to the computational resource constraints, most of the model compression methods in the pre-LLM era
*Corresponding Author Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

are no longer feasible for LLMs. Model compression methods for LLMs to date focus on model quantization (Dettmers et al. 2022; Xiao et al. 2023; Frantar et al. 2023; Dettmers et al. 2023) and unstructured pruning (Sun et al. 2023; Frantar and Alistarh 2023).
Structured pruning (He and Xiao 2023), which prunes entire rows or columns of weights, offers a promising solution to the deployment challenges of LLMs. Unlike unstructured pruning, structured pruning reduces both parameters and inference time without relying on specific hardware, making it more widely applicable (Anwar, Hwang, and Sung 2017). For effective structured pruning, it's crucial to have a metric that captures the collective significance of an entire row or column. However, current unstructured pruning techniques for LLMs, as seen in methods like (Sun et al. 2023; Frantar and Alistarh 2023), primarily focus on the importance of individual elements of each row in isolation. This absence of structured metrics that evaluate entire rows or columns makes them less suitable for structured pruning. The recent LLM-Pruner (Ma, Fang, and Wang 2023) attempted structured pruning for LLMs, but its dependence on LoRA finetuning (Hu et al. 2021) creates a tough trade-off between high computation and effective pruning, limiting its use in larger models.
Pruning essentially involves two key aspects: discovering redundancy and recovering performance. For an effective structured pruning method tailored to LLMs, three fundamental criteria must be satisfied: a) a structured importance metric to discover structured redundancy; b) a mechanism for adaptively searching the optimal global compression model structure; and c) a compensation strategy to minimize performance degradation.
In response to these three essential criteria, we introduce FLAP (FLuctuation-based Adaptive Structured Pruning), a novel structured pruning framework. We find that certain channels of hidden state features exhibit structured sample stability. This observation enables us to compensate for bias within the model using baseline values. Specifically, we design a structured pruning metric that estimates the fluctuation of each input feature relative to the baseline value, utilizing a set of calibration samples. This metric assists in determining whether the output feature map can be recovered when a column of the weight matrix is removed. We then standardize these fluctuation metric scores across lay-

ers and modules separately, allowing for the adaptive determination of the global compressed model structure. Finally, FLAP employs the baseline values to add additional biases, recovering the output feature maps for the corresponding layers. Remarkably, our method avoids the need for the retraining process and requires only a single forward pass for both pruning and bias compensation, thereby maintaining low memory overhead.
We evaluate the effectiveness of FLAP on the LLaMA model family, and FLAP achieves remarkable performance on a variety of language benchmarks. Impressively, without any retraining, our method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods, including LLM-Pruner and the extension of Wanda in structured pruning.
Our main contributions are listed as follows:
· We propose a novel retraining-free structured pruning framework for LLMs named FLAP. To our best knowledge, this is the first work that identifies the characteristic of structured sample stability in LLMs.
· The proposed framework uses a bias compensation mechanism, a pruning performance recovery method that does not require retraining. This mechanism yields greater benefits, especially under large pruning ratios.
· Our method achieves remarkable performance on a variety of language benchmarks and outperforms the stateof-the-art method without any retraining.
Related Works
Network Pruning Methods
Network pruning is a model compression technique that identifies and eliminates redundancy in the structure or parameters of a neural network, based on specific pruning metrics, and incorporates methods to recover model performance (LeCun, Denker, and Solla 1989; Hassibi, Stork, and Wolff 1993; Han et al. 2015). Pruning methods fall into two categories: unstructured pruning and structured pruning. Unstructured pruning is performed at the individual weight level, allowing for a large sparsity but failing to achieve real inference acceleration or storage reduction (Zafrir et al. 2021; Han, Mao, and Dally 2016). Within unstructured pruning, there exists a specialized variant known as semi-structured pruning. This approach enforces exactly N non-zero values in each block of M consecutive weights (Zhou et al. 2021). This approach has gained traction recently, particularly with support on newer NVIDIA hardware (Mishra et al. 2021). Structured pruning, by contrast, operates on entire rows or columns of weights, providing a more hardware-friendly solution that reduces storage requirements and enhances inference speed (Xia, Zhong, and Chen 2022; Molchanov et al. 2017).
However, conventional structured pruning methods typically rely on retraining (sometimes iteratively) to regain the performance of the pruned model (Han et al. 2015; Tan and Motani 2020; Han, Mao, and Dally 2016). Such methods pose scalability challenges for billion-scale LLMs due to constraints on memory and computational resources. Therefore a retraining-free structured pruning method for LLMs is very critical.

Large Language Model Compression
Large Language Models usually consist of billions of parameters, and their gradient backpropagation and training stage require large amounts of memory and computational resources. Consequently, many conventional model compression techniques have become infeasible for LLMs (Frantar and Alistarh 2023). For instance, knowledge distillation (Hinton, Vinyals, and Dean 2015), once a practical approach, now faces implementation challenges due to high training costs. Existing compression methods for LLMs mainly include post-training quantization (Dettmers et al. 2022; Xiao et al. 2023; Frantar et al. 2023; Dettmers et al. 2023) and post-training pruning (Sun et al. 2023; Frantar and Alistarh 2023). Our method also falls into the category of post-training pruning. It utilizes bias compensation to recover model performance, effectively avoiding the high computational cost of retraining. Unlike the past posttraining pruning methods, our method is designed for the features of structured pruning of LLMs.
Properties of LLMs
Our work is related to the distinct properties of Large Language Models (LLMs) that have inspired various model compression techniques (Sun et al. 2023; Dettmers et al. 2023, 2022). Dettmers et al. (Dettmers et al. 2022) observed the emergence of channels with abnormally large magnitudes in the hidden state features of LLMs once they exceed a certain parameter scale (e.g., 6B). They suggest that this is the reason why existing quantization methods fail on LLMs. In response, they introduced a novel mixed-precision quantization technique. Contrary to the focus of previous work on the outlier magnitudes in LLMs, our research pivots towards investigating the structured stability within the channels of input features in these models. In our study, we find that certain channels within the hidden state features demonstrate consistent structured sample stability. This discovery offers invaluable insights for crafting structured post-training pruning algorithms, laying the foundation for the method we present in this paper.
Preliminaries
Layer-Wise Pruning
Given the computational constraints, globally solving the pruning problem for Large Language Models (LLMs) is challenging. Layer-wise pruning becomes a practical solution under these constraints. Following this notion, SparseGPT (Frantar and Alistarh 2023) demonstrated that the challenge of unstructured pruning for LLMs can be tackled by decomposing it into individual layer-wise subproblems. This principle can be seamlessly extended to structured pruning within LLMs. The quality of solutions to these layer-wise subproblems can be evaluated based on the 2error. Given an input X of shape (N, Cin, L) where N and L represent batch and sequence dimensions respectively, and a weight W of shape (Cout, Cin), the 2-error for structured pruning can be defined as:
argminMRCin ,W ||WX - (M  W)X||22 (1)

