Break the Sequential Dependency of LLM Inference Using LOOKAHEAD DECODING

arXiv:2402.02057v1 [cs.LG] 3 Feb 2024

Yichao Fu 1 Peter Bailis 2 Ion Stoica 3 Hao Zhang 1

Abstract
Autoregressive decoding of large language models (LLMs) is memory bandwidth bounded, resulting in high latency and significant wastes of the parallel processing power of modern accelerators. Existing methods for accelerating LLM decoding often require a draft model (e.g., speculative decoding), which is nontrivial to obtain and unable to generalize. In this paper, we introduce LOOKAHEAD DECODING, an exact, parallel decoding algorithm that accelerates LLM decoding without needing auxiliary models or data stores. It allows trading per-step log(FLOPs) to reduce the number of total decoding steps, is more parallelizable on single or multiple modern accelerators, and is compatible with concurrent memory-efficient attention (e.g., FlashAttention). Our implementation of LOOKAHEAD DECODING can speed up autoregressive decoding by up to 1.8x on MT-bench and 4x with strong scaling on multiple GPUs in code completion tasks. Our code is avialable at https://github.com /hao-ai-lab/LookaheadDecoding
1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are transforming the AI industry. As they are increasingly integrated into diverse applications such as search (Team et al., 2023) and chatbots (Ouyang et al., 2022), generating long sequences at low-latency using LLMs is becoming one significant requirement. However, current LLMs generate text based on (Touvron et al., 2023a;b; Jiang et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023) autoregressive decoding, which falls short in efficiency, primarily for two reasons. First, autoregressive decoding generates only one token at a time. Hence, the overall generation time is proportional to the number of decoding steps. Second, each decoding step largely underutilizes the parallel processing capabilities of modern accelerators (e.g.,
1UCSD 2Google 3UC Berkeley. Correspondence to: Hao Zhang <haozhang@ucsd.edu>.

GPUs). Given the pressing need for low latency in various applications, improving autoregressive decoding remains a central challenge.
Several approaches have been proposed ­ one such approach is speculative decoding (Chen et al., 2023; Leviathan et al., 2023) and its variants (He et al., 2023; Stern et al., 2018; Cai et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Miao et al., 2023). These methods all follow a guess-and-verify approach: they use a draft model to speculate several subsequent tokens and then use the original (base) LLM to verify these tokens in parallel. Since the draft model requires much fewer resources and the cost of verifying multiple tokens in parallel is similar to the cost of generating a single token, these methods can achieve considerable speedups. However, their speedups are bounded by the token acceptance rate (§4.1), i.e., the fraction of tokens generated by the draft model that passes the verification test of the base model. This is because every token that fails verification needs to be regenerated by the base model. In the worst case, if most proposed tokens fail verification, these methods may slow down the decoding process. Therefore, achieving a high acceptance rate is essential for these methods. Unfortunately, training a draft model to achieve a high acceptance rate is non-trivial, and the trained draft model does not generalize across base models and datasets.
To address these problems, this paper develops LOOKAHEAD DECODING. We build upon a key observation: autoregressive decoding can be equivalently formulated as solving a non-linear system via the fixed point Jacobi iteration method (§2), which we term as Jacobi decoding (Santilli et al., 2023). Each Jacobi decoding step can generate multiple tokens in parallel at different positions. Although these tokens may appear at incorrect positions, we can leverage this parallel generation approach to have the LLM generate several disjoint n-grams in parallel in a single step. These n-grams could potentially be integrated into future parts of the generated sequence, pending verification by the base model to maintain the output distribution.
LOOKAHEAD DECODING takes advantage of the particular characteristics of autoregressive decoding, which is bounded by the memory bandwidth­as each generated token depends on all tokens before it­rather than compute, by

1

Lookahead decoding

using the available cycles to generate and verify n-grams (subsequent tokens) at virtually no additional cost. In a nutshell, LOOKAHEAD DECODING consists of a lookahead branch that generates n-grams and a verification branch that verifies n-grams, both executing in a single step. To improve efficiency, we use an n-gram pool to cache the historical n-grams generated so far. This way, LOOKAHEAD DECODING can significantly reduce the latency of LLM inference just by exploiting the compute resources that autoregressive decoding would leave unused. More importantly, LOOKAHEAD DECODING scales with the compute ­ we show that it can linearly reduce the number of decoding steps relative to the log(FLOPs) allocated per step.
We have implemented the algorithm in both Python and CUDA, compatible with memory-efficient attention algorithms (e.g., FlashAttention (Dao, 2023)), and supports various sampling methods without changing the output distribution. We also scale it to multiple GPUs, resulting in Lookahead Parallelism. We evaluate LOOKAHEAD DECODING on the popular LLaMA-2 (Touvron et al., 2023b) models. It achieves 1.8x speedup on the challenging multi-turn chat dataset MT-Bench (Zheng et al., 2023) and up to 4x speedup in code completion tasks with Lookahead Parallelism on 8 GPUs. LOOKAHEAD DECODING showed significant potential in lowering the latency for latency-sensitive tasks. Our contributions are summarized as follows.
· We design LOOKAHEAD DECODING, a new lossless, parallel decoding algorithm to accelerate LLM inference without needing any auxiliary component.
· We reveal LOOKAHEAD DECODING's scaling behavior: it linearly reduces the number of decoding steps according to per-step log(FLOPs). This enables tradeoffs between the number of decoding steps and per-step FLOPs, making it future-proof.
· We show it benefits from the latest memory-efficient attentions and is easily parallelizable by developing its distributed CUDA implementations.
· We evaluated LOOKAHEAD DECODING and demonstrate its effectiveness under different settings.
2. Background
In this section, we formulate both autoregressive and Jacobi decoding from the lens of solving nonlinear systems.
Causal Attention in Decoder Models. Most contemporary LLMs are composed of two core components: token-wise modules (including MLP and normalization (Ba et al., 2016; Zhang & Sennrich, 2019)) and attention (Vaswani et al., 2023) modules. Tokens interact with each other in the attention modules, while in other token-wise modules, they are processed without exchanging information with each other.

The attention layer encompasses three input elements: query
Q, key K, and value V, with the i-th token in each denoted
as Qi, Ki, and Vi, respectively. The attention layer executes the following operation: O = softmax QKT V. A lower triangular mask applied to QKT in causal attentions
(specific to decoder models) ensures that Oi is calculated only from Qi and Kj, Vj where j  i. Because all other layers in the LLM perform token-wise operations, for any
given model input x and output o, oi (i-th token in o) is exclusively influenced by xj (j-th token in x) where j  i.

Autoregressive Decoding in LLMs. LLMs take discrete integer sequences as inputs, where each integer represents a token. We notate x = (x1, x2, ..., xs)  Ns of length s as the input of the model, and x1t :m = (x1, x2, ..., xm) to denote a slice of x of length m at step t. LLMs' output characterizes the probability distribution of the next token. The probability for the s-th token (i.e., the output of the s - 1-th token) is decided by all previous input tokens, represented as PM (xs|x1:s-1). Then, the next token input xs is obtained by sampling from PM (xs|x1:s-1) using different methods (e.g., greedy, top-K, and top-P (Kool et al., 2020; Holtzman et al., 2020)). When using greedy sampling, the next token is selected by applying an argmax function on PM .
We define x0 as the prompt tokens given by the user. The LLM needs to generate an output sequence (of length m) from x0. Denote yi as the token generated at step i. The autoregressive decoding process of m tokens can be seen as solving the following m problems one by one (assume greedy sampling):

 

y1

= argmax PM (y1|x0)

 

y2

= argmax PM (y2|y1, x0)

...

(1)



 

ym

= argmax PM (ym|y1:m-1, x0)

Guess-And-Verify Paradigm. The Guess-And-Verify decoding paradigm speculates multiple potential future tokens and subsequently confirms the correctness of these speculations within a single decoding step. Take speculative decoding with greedy sampling as an example: at step t, with the prompt x0 and tokens y1:t-1 generated so far, we can use a draft model to autoregressively generate a draft sequence yt:t+n-1 of length n. Because yt:t+n-1 is known a priori, we then use the LLM to solve Eqs 2 in parallel, obtaining yt:t+n. Then, we verify if yt+i is equal to yt+i for each i from i = 0 to i = n - 1. If there is a match, we accept this token and proceed; otherwise, we stop checking and drop subsequent tokens. Finally, we update y with all accepted tokens.

 

yt

= argmax PM (yt|y1:t-1, x0)

 

yt+1

= argmax PM (yt+1|y1:t, x0)

...

(2)



 

yt+n = argmax PM (yt+n|y1:t+n-1, x0)

2

