Taming Throughput-Latency Tradeoff in LLM Inference with Sarathi-Serve
Amey Agrawal*2, Nitin Kedia1, Ashish Panwar1, Jayashree Mohan1, Nipun Kwatra1, Bhargav S. Gulavani1, Alexey Tumanov2, and Ramachandran Ramjee1
1Microsoft Research India 2Georgia Institute of Technology

arXiv:2403.02310v3 [cs.LG] 17 Jun 2024 Tokens Generated Time-between-tokens (P99, seconds)

Abstract
Each LLM serving request goes through two phases. The first is prefill which processes the entire input prompt and produces the first output token and the second is decode which generates the rest of output tokens, one-at-a-time. Prefill iterations have high latency but saturate GPU compute due to parallel processing of the input prompt. In contrast, decode iterations have low latency but also low compute utilization because a decode iteration processes only a single token per request. This makes batching highly effective for decodes and consequently for overall throughput. However, batching multiple requests leads to an interleaving of prefill and decode iterations which makes it challenging to achieve both high throughput and low latency.
We introduce an efficient LLM inference scheduler, SarathiServe, to address this throughput-latency tradeoff. SarathiServe introduces chunked-prefills which splits a prefill request into near equal sized chunks and creates stall-free schedules that adds new requests in a batch without pausing ongoing decodes. Stall-free scheduling unlocks the opportunity to improve throughput with large batch sizes while minimizing the effect of batching on latency. Furthermore, uniform batches in Sarathi-Serve ameliorate the imbalance between iterations, resulting in minimal pipeline bubbles.
Our techniques yield significant improvements in inference performance across models and hardware under tail latency constraints. For Mistral-7B on single A100 GPUs, we achieve 2.6× higher serving capacity and up to 3.7× higher serving capacity for the Yi-34B model on two A100 GPUs as compared to vLLM. When used with pipeline parallelism on Falcon180B, Sarathi-Serve provides up to 5.6× gain in the end-toend serving capacity. The source code for Sarathi-Serve is available at https://github.com/microsoft/sarathi-serve.
*Part of this work was done during an internship at MSR India.

30K 20K

Sarathi-Serve vLLM

10K 0K 0

Generation stall

200

210

220

100 200 300 Time (s)

(a) Generation stall.

1.25 1.00

vLLM Sarathi-Serve

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00 0.55

0.7

1.0

Queries per Second

(b) High tail latency.

Figure 1: Yi-34B running on two A100 GPUs serving 128 requests from arxiv-summarisation trace. 1a highlights one of the many generation stalls lasting over several seconds in vLLM [53]. 1b shows the impact of increasing load on tail latency. Sarathi-Serve improves throughput while eliminating generation stalls.

1 Introduction

Large language models (LLMs) [34,35,52,57,71] have shown impressive abilities in a wide variety of tasks spanning natural language processing, question answering, code generation, etc. This has led to tremendous increase in their usage across many applications such as chatbots [2, 5, 6, 57], search [4, 9, 11, 19, 25], code assistants [1, 8, 20], etc. The significant GPU compute required for running inference on large models, coupled with significant increase in their usage, has made LLM inference a dominant GPU workload today. Thus, optimizing LLM inference has been a key focus for many recent systems [29, 53, 58, 59, 63, 75, 77].
Optimizing throughput and latency are both important objectives in LLM inference since the former helps keep serving costs tractable while the latter is necessary to meet application requirements. In this paper, we show that current LLM serving systems have to face a tradeoff between throughput and latency. In particular, LLM inference throughput can be increased significantly with batching. However, the way existing systems batch multiple requests leads to a compromise on either throughput or latency. For example, Figure 1b shows

that increasing load can significantly increase tail latency in a state-of-the-art LLM serving system vLLM [53].
Each LLM inference request goes through two phases ­ a prefill phase followed by a decode phase. The prefill phase corresponds to the processing of the input prompt and the decode phase corresponds to the autoregressive token generation. The prefill phase is compute-bound because it processes all tokens of an input prompt in parallel whereas the decode phase is memory-bound because it processes only one token per-request at a time. Therefore, decodes benefit significantly from batching because larger batches can use GPUs more efficiently whereas prefills do not benefit from batching.
Current LLM inference schedulers can be broadly classified into two categories1, namely, prefill-prioritizing and decodeprioritizing depending on how they schedule the prefill and decode phases while batching requests. In this paper, we argue that both strategies have fundamental pitfalls that make them unsuitable for serving online inference (see Figure 2).
Traditional request-level batching systems such as FasterTransformer [7] employ decode-prioritizing scheduling. These systems submit a batch of requests to the execution engine that first computes the prefill phase of all requests and then schedules their decode phase. The batch completes only after all requests in it have finished their decode phase i.e., new prefills are not scheduled as long as one or more requests are doing decodes. This strategy optimizes inference for latency metric time-between-tokens or TBT ­ an important performance metric for LLMs. This is because new requests do not affect the execution of ongoing requests in their decode phase. However, decode-prioritizing schedulers severely compromise on throughput because even if some requests in a batch finish early, the execution continues with reduced batch size until the completion of the last request.
Orca [75] introduced iteration-level batching wherein requests can dynamically enter or exit a batch at the granularity of individual iterations. Iteration-level batching improves throughput by avoiding inefficiencies of request-level batching systems. Orca and several other recent systems like vLLM [23] combine iteration-level batching with prefillprioritizing scheduling wherein they eagerly schedule the prefill phase of one or more requests first i.e., whenever GPU memory becomes available. This way, prefill-prioritizing schedulers have better throughput because computing prefills first allows subsequent decodes to operate at high batch sizes. However, prioritizing prefills leads to high latency because it interferes with ongoing decodes. Since prefills can take arbitrarily long time depending on the lengths of the given prompts, prefill-prioritizing schedulers lead to an undesirable phenomenon that we refer to as generation stalls in this paper. For example, Figure 1a shows that a generation stall in vLLM can last over several seconds.
Another challenge introduced by traditional iteration-level
1We classify recent schedulers Splitwise [58] and DistServe [77] under a third category "disaggregated" and discuss them in §6.

Throughput

Sarathi-Serve Stall-free batching
Iteration-level batching
FasterTransformer Decode prioritizing

vLLM Prefill prioritizing
Paged Attention
Orca Prefill prioritizing

TBT Latency

Figure 2: Current LLM serving systems involve a tradeoff between throughput and latency depending on their scheduling policy. Prioritizing prefills optimizes throughput but sacrifices TBT (time-between-tokens) tail latency whereas prioritizing decodes has the opposite effect. Sarathi-Serve serves high throughput with low TBT latency via stall-free batching. (The figure is illustrative and actual values will depend on the model and workload characteristics.)

scheduling systems like Orca [75] is pipeline stalls or bubbles [49]. These appear in pipeline-parallelism (PP) deployments that are needed to scale LLM inference across several nodes. In servers with high bandwidth connectivity such as NVIDIA DGX A100 [16], tensor-parallelism (TP) [64] can enable deployment of an LLM on up to 8 GPUs, supporting large batch sizes with low latencies. However, TP can have prohibitively high latencies when hyper-clusters are unavailable [33]. Thus, as an alternative to TP, pipeline-parallelism (PP) [33, 55] is typically used across commodity networks. Existing systems rely on micro-batches to mitigate pipeline stalls or bubbles [49]. However, the standard micro-batch based scheduling can still lead to pipeline bubbles due to the unique characteristics of LLM inference. Specifically, LLM inference consists of a mixture of varying length prefills and decodes. The resulting schedule can thus have wildly varying runtimes across different micro-batches that waste GPU cycles and degrade the overall system throughput.
To address these challenges, we propose Sarathi-Serve, a scheduler to balance the throughput-latency tradeoff for scalable online LLM inference serving. Sarathi-Serve is based on two key ideas: chunked-prefills and stall-free scheduling. Chunked-prefills splits a prefill request into equal computesized chunks and computes a prompt's prefill phase over multiple iterations (each with a subset of the prompt tokens). Stall-free scheduling allows new requests to join a running batch without pausing ongoing decodes. This involves constructing a batch by coalescing all the on-going decodes with one (or more) prefill chunks from new requests such that each batch reaches the pre-configured chunk size. Sarathi-Serve builds upon iteration-level batching but with an important distinction: it throttles the number of prefill tokens in each it-

