QuIP#: Even Better LLM Quantization with Hadamard Incoherence and Lattice Codebooks

arXiv:2402.04396v2 [cs.LG] 4 Jun 2024 Wikitext2 Perplexity (ctx 4096)

Albert Tseng * 1 Jerry Chee * 1 Qingyao Sun 2 Volodymyr Kuleshov 1 Christopher De Sa 1

Abstract
Post-training quantization (PTQ) reduces the memory footprint of LLMs by quantizing their weights to low-precision. In this work, we introduce QuIP#, a weight-only PTQ method that achieves state-of-the-art results in extreme compression regimes ( 4 bits per weight) using three novel techniques. First, QuIP# improves QuIP's (Chee et al., 2023) incoherence processing by using the randomized Hadamard transform, which is faster and has better theoretical properties. Second, QuIP# uses vector quantization to take advantage of the ball-shaped sub-Gaussian distribution that incoherent weights possess: specifically, we introduce a set of hardware-efficient codebooks based on the highly symmetric E8 lattice, which achieves the optimal 8-dimension unit ball packing. Third, QuIP# uses fine-tuning to improve fidelity to the original model. Our experiments show that QuIP# outperforms existing PTQ methods, enables new behaviors in PTQ scaling, and supports fast inference. Our code can be found at https://github.com/ Cornell-RelaxML/quip-sharp.
1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have driven rapid advances across diverse fields such as natural language processing (Touvron et al., 2023b), scientific modeling (Nguyen et al., 2023), and program synthesis (Rozie`re et al., 2024). However, the massive size of these models poses significant challenges to their deployment. For example, the largest model in the Llama 2 family has 70B parameters, and requires 140GB of GPU memory in native 16-bit precision (Touvron
*Equal contribution 1Department of Computer Science, Cornell University 2Department of Operations Research and Information Engineering, Cornell University. Correspondence to: Albert Tseng <albert@cs.cornell.edu>, Jerry Chee <jerrychee@cs.cornell.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by the author(s).

7

6

5 QuIP# 2 Bit

QuIP# 3 Bit

QuIP# 4 Bit 4
AQLM ~2 Bit

Theoretical Lossless (FP16) 4 Bit

QuIP 2 Bit 3

5E+10

1E+11

Model Size (Bits)

Figure 1. QuIP# offers unprecedented quantization quality at extreme compression ratios. QuIP# 3-bit models also scale better than theoretically lossless 4-bit models, a previously unseen result.

et al., 2023b). This massive memory footprint motivates research into lossless LLM compression methods.
Post-training quantization (PTQ) linearly reduces the memory footprint of models by storing trained weights with less precision. For example, Llama 2 70B only requires < 20GB of memory when quantized to 2 bits. This not only lets large models fit on smaller devices, but also enables faster throughput in memory bound settings such as autoregressive decoding. However, existing quantization methods either do not scale to extreme compression ratios (Shao et al., 2024) or have expensive decoding schemes (Egiazarian et al., 2024), motivating the development of both good and fast PTQ methods.
In this work, we introduce QuIP#, a weight-only PTQ method that achieves a new state-of-the-art in model quantization. QuIP# improves over existing work via three techniques: incoherence processing, lattice codebooks, and fine-tuning. Incoherence processing is a principled form of outlier suppression that produces approximately Gaussian distributed weight matrices (Chee et al., 2023). QuIP#

1

Original Model

Weights

QuIP#

Hadamard Transform

Lattice Code

Fine-Tuning

Compressed Model

Figure 2. QuIP# performs incoherence processing with a Randomized Hadamard Transform and uses lattice codebooks to achieve stateof-the-art quantized models.

performs incoherence processing with the computationallyefficient randomized Hadamard transform (Halko et al., 2011) (Section 3). To quantize incoherent matrices, QuIP# uses the BlockLDLQ block adaptive rounding algorithm with compressible codebooks based on the E8 lattice, which achieves the highest density 8 dimensional unit-ball packing (Viazovska, 2017) (Section 4). The E8 lattice is highly structured and symmetric, allowing our codebooks to be hardware-friendly and admit fast inference. Finally, QuIP# includes an inter-layer fine-tuning algorithm that further improves quantization quality (Section 5).
QuIP# significantly outperforms existing PTQ methods including OmniQuant (Shao et al., 2024), QuIP (Chee et al., 2023) (a previous, separate work), and AQLM (Egiazarian et al., 2024). To the best of our knowledge, QuIP# is also the first PTQ method where 3-bit models scale better than 4-bit models. This directly refutes Dettmers & Zettlemoyer (2023)'s claim that 4-bit models are "optimal" and indicates that as the field of PTQ develops, 2-bit models are likely to scale better than 3-bit models in the near future. Moreover, QuIP# was designed from the ground up to be fast. Algorithm 2 describes fast inference with a QuIP#-quantized linear layer. Our "proof of concept" CUDA implementation of QuIP# achieves over 50% of peak memory bandwidth on a NVIDIA RTX 4090, validating our design choices.
In summary, we introduce QuIP#, a post-training quantization method that achieves state-of-the-art results by
1. Performing incoherence processing with the Randomized Hadamard Transform, which has better incoherence properties and faster runtime than the Kronecker factorization in QuIP.
2. Rounding incoherence-processed weight matrices with block adaptive rounding and codebooks based on the E8 lattice, which achieves the highest 8-dimension unit ball packing density (kissing number).
3. Introducing an inter-layer fine-tuning algorithm that further improves quantization quality.

Algorithm 1 QuIP# without Fine-Tuning (QuIP#-NoFT) input Weight W  Rm×n, hessians H  Rn×n, g-dim. k-
bit codebook C W^ , H^ , SU , SV  IP-RHT(W, H) (Alg. 3) W^  BlockLDLQ(W^ , H^ , C) (Sec. 4.1) output W^ , SU , SV
Algorithm 2 QuIP# Inference (for a Linear Layer) input W^ , SU , SV from Alg. 1, g-dim. k-bit codebook C,
input x  Rn. y  Had(SV  x) where Had performs
an orthogonal Hadamard transform (Sec. 3) y  decompress_multiply(W^ , C, y) y  Had(SU  y) output y
2. Background / Related Work
2.1. Compressing LLMs
A large body of work has focused on compressing LLMs, as doing so can directly benefit LLM inference at scale. Methods such as pruning, quantization aware training (QAT), and post-training quantization (PTQ) all focus on different areas of this problem and are not strictly orthogonal to each other. Pruning removes weights from models while preserving model quality and inference performance (Chee et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2023). QAT focuses on training models that are more "quantizable" but usually requires training models from scratch (Nagel et al., 2022; Xi et al., 2023). PTQ, which QuIP# falls under, instead quantizes pre-trained models. PTQ requires less compute than QAT and achieves competitive performance (Chee et al., 2023; Frantar et al., 2023; Shao et al., 2024; Egiazarian et al., 2024). For the rest of this paper, we focus on PTQ.

2.2. Quantization and Adaptive Rounding
In QuIP#, we follow existing state-of-the-art PTQ methods and round weights to minimize the per-layer proxy loss, as

2

