Cluster-GCN: An Efficient Algorithm for Training Deep and Large Graph Convolutional Networks

Wei-Lin Chiang
National Taiwan University r06922166@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Xuanqing Liu
University of California, Los Angeles xqliu@cs.ucla.edu

Si Si
Google Research sisidaisy@google.com

arXiv:1905.07953v2 [cs.LG] 8 Aug 2019

Yang Li
Google Research liyang@google.com

Samy Bengio
Google Research bengio@google.com

Cho-Jui Hsieh
University of California, Los Angeles chohsieh@cs.ucla.edu

ABSTRACT
Graph convolutional network (GCN) has been successfully applied to many graph-based applications; however, training a large-scale GCN remains challenging. Current SGD-based algorithms suffer from either a high computational cost that exponentially grows with number of GCN layers, or a large space requirement for keeping the entire graph and the embedding of each node in memory. In this paper, we propose Cluster-GCN, a novel GCN algorithm that is suitable for SGD-based training by exploiting the graph clustering structure. Cluster-GCN works as the following: at each step, it samples a block of nodes that associate with a dense subgraph identified by a graph clustering algorithm, and restricts the neighborhood search within this subgraph. This simple but effective strategy leads to significantly improved memory and computational efficiency while being able to achieve comparable test accuracy with previous algorithms. To test the scalability of our algorithm, we create a new Amazon2M data with 2 million nodes and 61 million edges which is more than 5 times larger than the previous largest publicly available dataset (Reddit). For training a 3-layer GCN on this data, Cluster-GCN is faster than the previous state-of-the-art VR-GCN (1523 seconds vs 1961 seconds) and using much less memory (2.2GB vs 11.2GB). Furthermore, for training 4 layer GCN on this data, our algorithm can finish in around 36 minutes while all the existing GCN training algorithms fail to train due to the out-of-memory issue. Furthermore, Cluster-GCN allows us to train much deeper GCN without much time and memory overhead, which leads to improved prediction accuracy--using a 5-layer Cluster-GCN, we achieve state-of-the-art test F1 score 99.36 on the PPI dataset, while the previous best result was 98.71 by [16]. Our codes are publicly available at https://github.com/google-research/google-research/ tree/master/cluster_gcn.
ACM Reference Format: Wei-Lin Chiang, Xuanqing Liu, Si Si, Yang Li, Samy Bengio, and Cho-Jui Hsieh. 2019. Cluster-GCN: An Efficient Algorithm for Training Deep and
This work was done during the first and the second author's internship at Google Research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). KDD '19, August 4­8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA © 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6201-6/19/08. https://doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330925

Large Graph Convolutional Networks. In The 25th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD '19), August 4­ 8, 2019, Anchorage, AK, USA. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https: //doi.org/10.1145/3292500.3330925
1 INTRODUCTION
Graph convolutional network (GCN) [9] has become increasingly popular in addressing many graph-based applications, including semi-supervised node classification [9], link prediction [17] and recommender systems [15]. Given a graph, GCN uses a graph convolution operation to obtain node embeddings layer by layer--at each layer, the embedding of a node is obtained by gathering the embeddings of its neighbors, followed by one or a few layers of linear transformations and nonlinear activations. The final layer embedding is then used for some end tasks. For instance, in node classification problems, the final layer embedding is passed to a classifier to predict node labels, and thus the parameters of GCN can be trained in an end-to-end manner.
Since the graph convolution operator in GCN needs to propagate embeddings using the interaction between nodes in the graph, this makes training quite challenging. Unlike other neural networks that the training loss can be perfectly decomposed into individual terms on each sample, the loss term in GCN (e.g., classification loss on a single node) depends on a huge number of other nodes, especially when GCN goes deep. Due to the node dependence, GCN's training is very slow and requires lots of memory ­ backpropagation needs to store all the embeddings in the computation graph in GPU memory.
Previous GCN Training Algorithms: To demonstrate the need of developing a scalable GCN training algorithm, we first discuss the pros and cons of existing approaches, in terms of 1) memory requirement1, 2) time per epoch2 and 3) convergence speed (loss reduction) per epoch. These three factors are crucial for evaluating a training algorithm. Note that memory requirement directly restricts the scalability of algorithm, and the later two factors combined together will determine the training speed. In the following discussion we denote N to be the number of nodes in the graph, F the embedding dimension, and L the number of layers to analyze classic GCN training algorithms. · Full-batch gradient descent is proposed in the first GCN pa-
per [9]. To compute the full gradient, it requires storing all the
1Here we consider the memory for storing node embeddings, which is dense and usually dominates the overall memory usage for deep GCN. 2An epoch means a complete data pass.

intermediate embeddings, leading to O(N F L) memory requirement, which is not scalable. Furthermore, although the time per epoch is efficient, the convergence of gradient descent is slow since the parameters are updated only once per epoch. [memory: bad; time per epoch: good; convergence: bad] · Mini-batch SGD is proposed in [5]. Since each update is only based on a mini-batch gradient, it can reduce the memory requirement and conduct many updates per epoch, leading to a faster convergence. However, mini-batch SGD introduces a significant computational overhead due to the neighborhood expansion problem--to compute the loss on a single node at layer L, it requires that node's neighbor nodes' embeddings at layer L - 1, which again requires their neighbors' embeddings at layer L - 2 and recursive ones in the downstream layers. This leads to time complexity exponential to the GCN depth. GraphSAGE [5] proposed to use a fixed size of neighborhood samples during back-propagation through layers and FastGCN [1] proposed importance sampling, but the overhead of these methods is still large and will become worse when GCN goes deep. [memory: good; time per epoch: bad; convergence: good] · VR-GCN [2] proposes to use a variance reduction technique to reduce the size of neighborhood sampling nodes. Despite successfully reducing the size of samplings (in our experiments VR-GCN with only 2 samples per node works quite well), it requires storing all the intermediate embeddings of all the nodes in memory, leading to O(N F L) memory requirement. If the number of nodes in the graph increases to millions, the memory requirement for VR-GCN may be too high to fit into GPU. [memory: bad; time per epoch: good; convergence: good.]
In this paper, we propose a novel GCN training algorithm by exploiting the graph clustering structure. We find that the efficiency of a mini-batch algorithm can be characterized by the notion of "embedding utilization", which is proportional to the number of links between nodes in one batch or within-batch links. This finding motivates us to design the batches using graph clustering algorithms that aims to construct partitions of nodes so that there are more graph links between nodes in the same partition than nodes in different partitions. Based on the graph clustering idea, we proposed Cluster-GCN, an algorithm to design the batches based on efficient graph clustering algorithms (e.g., METIS [8]). We take this idea further by proposing a stochastic multi-clustering framework to improve the convergence of Cluster-GCN. Our strategy leads to huge memory and computational benefits. In terms of memory, we only need to store the node embeddings within the current batch, which is O(bF L) with the batch size b. This is significantly better than VR-GCN and full gradient decent, and slightly better than other SGD-based approaches. In terms of computational complexity, our algorithm achieves the same time cost per epoch with gradient descent and is much faster than neighborhood searching approaches. In terms of the convergence speed, our algorithm is competitive with other SGD-based approaches. Finally, our algorithm is simple to implement since we only compute matrix multiplication and no neighborhood sampling is needed. Therefore for Cluster-GCN, we have [memory: good; time per epoch: good; convergence: good].
We conducted comprehensive experiments on several large-scale graph datasets and made the following contributions:

· Cluster-GCN achieves the best memory usage on large-scale graphs, especially on deep GCN. For example, Cluster-GCN uses 5x less memory than VRGCN in a 3-layer GCN model on Amazon2M. Amazon2M is a new graph dataset that we construct to demonstrate the scalablity of the GCN algorithms. This dataset contains a amazon product co-purchase graph with more than 2 millions nodes and 61 millions edges.
· Cluster-GCN achieves a similar training speed with VR-GCN for shallow networks (e.g., 2 layers) but can be faster than VRGCN when the network goes deeper (e.g., 4 layers), since our complexity is linear to the number of layers L while VR-GCN's complexity is exponential to L.
· Cluster-GCN is able to train a very deep network that has a large embedding size. Although several previous works show that deep GCN does not give better performance, we found that with proper optimization, deeper GCN could help the accuracy. For example, with a 5-layer GCN, we obtain a new benchmark accuracy 99.36 for PPI dataset, comparing with the highest reported one 98.71 by [16].
Implementation of our proposed method is publicly available.3

2 BACKGROUND
Suppose we are given a graph G = (V, E, A), which consists of N = |V | vertices and |E | edges such that an edge between any two vertices i and j represents their similarity. The corresponding adjacency matrix A is an N × N sparse matrix with (i, j) entry equaling to 1 if there is an edge between i and j and 0 otherwise. Also, each node is associated with an F -dimensional feature vector and X  RN ×F denotes the feature matrix for all N nodes. An L-layer GCN [9] consists of L graph convolution layers and each of them
constructs embeddings for each node by mixing the embeddings of
the node's neighbors in the graph from the previous layer:

Z (l +1) = AX (l )W (l ), X (l +1) =  (Z (l +1)),

(1)

where X (l)  RN ×Fl is the embedding at the l-th layer for all the N nodes and X (0) = X ; A is the normalized and regularized adjacency matrix and W (l)  RFl ×Fl+1 is the feature transformation matrix which will be learnt for the downstream tasks. Note that for
simplicity we assume the feature dimensions are the same for all layers (F1 = · · · = FL = F ). The activation function  (·) is usually set to be the element-wise ReLU.
Semi-supervised node classification is a popular application of
GCN. When using GCN for this application, the goal is to learn
weight matrices in (1) by minimizing the loss function:

L

=

1 |YL |

i YL

loss(yi , ziL),

(2)

where YL contains all the labels for the labeled nodes; zi(L) is the i-th row of Z (L) with the ground-truth label to be yi , indicating the final layer prediction of node i. In practice, a cross-entropy loss is commonly used for node classification in multi-class or multi-label
problems.

3 https://github.com/google- research/google- research/tree/master/cluster_gcn

