Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows

arXiv:1505.05770v6 [stat.ML] 14 Jun 2016

Danilo Jimenez Rezende Shakir Mohamed
Google DeepMind, London

DANILOR@GOOGLE.COM SHAKIR@GOOGLE.COM

Abstract
The choice of approximate posterior distribution is one of the core problems in variational inference. Most applications of variational inference employ simple families of posterior approximations in order to allow for efficient inference, focusing on mean-field or other simple structured approximations. This restriction has a significant impact on the quality of inferences made using variational methods. We introduce a new approach for specifying flexible, arbitrarily complex and scalable approximate posterior distributions. Our approximations are distributions constructed through a normalizing flow, whereby a simple initial density is transformed into a more complex one by applying a sequence of invertible transformations until a desired level of complexity is attained. We use this view of normalizing flows to develop categories of finite and infinitesimal flows and provide a unified view of approaches for constructing rich posterior approximations. We demonstrate that the theoretical advantages of having posteriors that better match the true posterior, combined with the scalability of amortized variational approaches, provides a clear improvement in performance and applicability of variational inference.
1. Introduction
There has been a great deal of renewed interest in variational inference as a means of scaling probabilistic modeling to increasingly complex problems on increasingly larger data sets. Variational inference now lies at the core of large-scale topic models of text (Hoffman et al., 2013), provides the state-of-the-art in semi-supervised classification (Kingma et al., 2014), drives the models that currently produce the most realistic generative models of images (Gregor et al., 2014; 2015; Rezende et al., 2014; Kingma & Welling, 2014), and are a default tool for the understanding
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

of many physical and chemical systems. Despite these successes and ongoing advances, there are a number of disadvantages of variational methods that limit their power and hamper their wider adoption as a default method for statistical inference. It is one of these limitations, the choice of posterior approximation, that we address in this paper.
Variational inference requires that intractable posterior distributions be approximated by a class of known probability distributions, over which we search for the best approximation to the true posterior. The class of approximations used is often limited, e.g., mean-field approximations, implying that no solution is ever able to resemble the true posterior distribution. This is a widely raised objection to variational methods, in that unlike other inferential methods such as MCMC, even in the asymptotic regime we are unable recover the true posterior distribution.
There is much evidence that richer, more faithful posterior approximations do result in better performance. For example, when compared to sigmoid belief networks that make use of mean-field approximations, deep auto-regressive networks use a posterior approximation with an autoregressive dependency structure that provides a clear improvement in performance (Mnih & Gregor, 2014). There is also a large body of evidence that describes the detrimental effect of limited posterior approximations. Turner & Sahani (2011) provide an exposition of two commonly experienced problems. The first is the widely-observed problem of under-estimation of the variance of the posterior distribution, which can result in poor predictions and unreliable decisions based on the chosen posterior approximation. The second is that the limited capacity of the posterior approximation can also result in biases in the MAP estimates of any model parameters (and this is the case e.g., in time-series models).
A number of proposals for rich posterior approximations have been explored, typically based on structured meanfield approximations that incorporate some basic form of dependency within the approximate posterior. Another potentially powerful alternative would be to specify the approximate posterior as a mixture model, such as those developed by Jaakkola & Jordan (1998); Jordan et al. (1999); Gershman et al. (2012). But the mixture approach limits

Variational Inference with Normalizing Flows

the potential scalability of variational inference since it requires evaluation of the log-likelihood and its gradients for each mixture component per parameter update, which is typically computationally expensive.
This paper presents a new approach for specifying approximate posterior distributions for variational inference. We begin by reviewing the current best practice for inference in general directed graphical models, based on amortized variational inference and efficient Monte Carlo gradient estimation, in section 2. We then make the following contributions:
· We propose the specification of approximate posterior distributions using normalizing flows, a tool for constructing complex distributions by transforming a probability density through a series of invertible mappings (sect. 3). Inference with normalizing flows provides a tighter, modified variational lower bound with additional terms that only add terms with linear time complexity (sect 4).
· We show that normalizing flows admit infinitesimal flows that allow us to specify a class of posterior approximations that in the asymptotic regime is able to recover the true posterior distribution, overcoming one oft-quoted limitation of variational inference.
· We present a unified view of related approaches for improved posterior approximation as the application of special types of normalizing flows (sect 5).
· We show experimentally that the use of general normalizing flows systematically outperforms other competing approaches for posterior approximation.
2. Amortized Variational Inference
To perform inference it is sufficient to reason using the marginal likelihood of a probabilistic model, and requires the marginalization of any missing or latent variables in the model. This integration is typically intractable, and instead, we optimize a lower bound on the marginal likelihood. Consider a general probabilistic model with observations x, latent variables z over which we must integrate, and model parameters . We introduce an approximate posterior distribution for the latent variables q(z|x) and follow the variational principle (Jordan et al., 1999) to obtain a bound on the marginal likelihood:

log p(x) = log p(x|z)p(z)dz

(1)

= log

q q

(z|x) (z|x)

p

(x|z)p(z)dz

(2)

 -IDKL[q(z|x) p(z)]+Eq [log p(x|z)] = -F(x), (3)

where we used Jensen's inequality to obtain the final equation, p(x|z) is a likelihood function and p(z) is a prior over the latent variables. We can easily extend this formulation to posterior inference over the parameters , but

we will focus on inference over the latent variables only. This bound is often referred to as the negative free energy F or as the evidence lower bound (ELBO). It consists of two terms: the first is the KL divergence between the approximate posterior and the prior distribution (which acts as a regularizer), and the second is a reconstruction error. This bound (3) provides a unified objective function for optimization of both the parameters  and  of the model and variational approximation, respectively.
Current best practice in variational inference performs this optimization using mini-batches and stochastic gradient descent, which is what allows variational inference to be scaled to problems with very large data sets. There are two problems that must be addressed to successfully use the variational approach: 1) efficient computation of the derivatives of the expected loglikelihood Eq(z)[log p(x|z)], and 2) choosing the richest, computationally-feasible approximate posterior distribution q(·). The second problem is the focus of this paper. To address the first problem, we make use of two tools: Monte Carlo gradient estimation and inference networks, which when used together is what we refer to as amortized variational inference.
2.1. Stochastic Backpropagation
The bulk of research in variational inference over the years has been on ways in which to compute the gradient of the expected log-likelihood Eq(z)[log p(x|z)]. Whereas we would have previously resorted to local variational methods (Bishop, 2006), in general we now always compute such expectations using Monte Carlo approximations (including the KL term in the bound, if it is not analytically known). This forms what has been aptly named doublystochastic estimation (Titsias & Lazaro-Gredilla, 2014), since we have one source of stochasticity from the minibatch and a second from the Monte Carlo approximation of the expectation.
We focus on models with continuous latent variables, and the approach we take computes the required gradients using a non-centered reparameterization of the expectation (Papaspiliopoulos et al., 2003; Williams, 1992), combined with Monte Carlo approximation -- referred to as stochastic backpropagation (Rezende et al., 2014). This approach has also been referred to or as stochastic gradient variational Bayes (SGVB) (Kingma & Welling, 2014) or as affine variational inference (Challis & Barber, 2012).
Stochastic backpropagation involves two steps:
· Reparameterization. We reparameterize the latent variable in terms of a known base distribution and a differentiable transformation (such as a locationscale transformation or cumulative distribution function). For example, if q(z) is a Gaussian distribution N (z|µ, 2), with  = {µ, 2}, then the location-scale

