Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

arXiv:2306.11695v3 [cs.CL] 6 May 2024

A SIMPLE AND EFFECTIVE PRUNING APPROACH FOR LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS

Mingjie Sun1 Zhuang Liu2

Anna Bair1

J. Zico Kolter1,3

1Carnegie Mellon University 2Meta AI Research 3Bosch Center for AI

ABSTRACT
As their size increases, Large Languages Models (LLMs) are natural candidates for network pruning methods: approaches that drop a subset of network weights while striving to preserve performance. Existing methods, however, require either retraining, which is rarely affordable for billion-scale LLMs, or solving a weight reconstruction problem reliant on second-order information, which may also be computationally expensive. In this paper, we introduce a novel, straightforward yet effective pruning method, termed Wanda (Pruning by Weights and activations), designed to induce sparsity in pretrained LLMs. Motivated by the recent observation of emergent large magnitude features in LLMs, our approach prunes weights with the smallest magnitudes multiplied by the corresponding input activations, on a per-output basis. Notably, Wanda requires no retraining or weight update, and the pruned LLM can be used as is. We conduct a thorough evaluation of our method Wanda on LLaMA and LLaMA-2 across various language benchmarks. Wanda significantly outperforms the established baseline of magnitude pruning and performs competitively against recent method involving intensive weight update. Code is available at https://github.com/locuslab/wanda.
1 INTRODUCTION
Large language models (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023) have recently reshaped the field of NLP with their remarkable performance across a range of complex language benchmarks (Bommarito & Katz, 2022; Wei et al., 2022a; Bubeck et al., 2023). However, these models, with their billions of parameters, usually require significant computational resources. To democratize LLMs, considerable efforts have been taken to mitigate their high computational cost. Many of the notable advancements to date have centered on model quantization, a process where parameters are quantized into lower bit-level representations. The fast pace of LLM quantization research (Dettmers et al., 2022; Frantar et al., 2023a; Xiao et al., 2023; Ahmadian et al., 2023) has led to substantial resource savings for these models (Sheng et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023).
Network pruning (LeCun et al., 1989; Hassibi et al., 1993; Han et al., 2015), on the other hand, shrinks network sizes by removing specific weights from the model ­ essentially setting them to zero. Along with quantization, it is often considered another popular approach for compressing neural networks. However, it has received relatively little focus in compressing LLMs. This seems to contradict the trend of model compression in the pre-LLM era, where both approaches have received large amounts of research effort. A quick review of existing pruning methods reveals a possible reason: they typically require retraining (Liu et al., 2019; Blalock et al., 2020), training from random initializations (Zhu & Gupta, 2017; Louizos et al., 2018; Gale et al., 2019) or even an extensive iterative process (Frankle & Michael, 2019; Renda et al., 2020). The sheer amount of computational resources required by LLMs limits these methods. A recent LLM pruning approach, SparseGPT (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023), does not require traditional retraining, but still demands a computationally intensive weight update process.
The argument concerning the need for retraining and weight update does not fully capture the challenges of pruning LLMs. One might reasonably expect to obtain a fairly high-performing initialization point for retraining using existing popular pruning methods. However, a recent study (Frantar &
Equal contribution. Correspondence to mingjies@cs.cmu.edu and zhuangl@meta.com.
1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024

Magnitude Pruning

Wanda

4 0 1 -1 3 -2 -1 -3 -3 1 0 2
Weights

4011 3213 3102 Weight Importance
grouped per layer

4000 3 -2 0 -3 -3 0 0 2 Pruned Weights

4 0 1 -1

3 -2 -1 -3 4 0 8 3

-3 1 0 2

3489

3206

1283

Weight Importance

Weights and activations grouped per output

4010 0 0 -1 -3 -3 0 0 2 Pruned Weights

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed method Wanda (Pruning by Weights and activations), compared with the magnitude pruning approach. Given a weight matrix W and input feature activations X, we compute the weight importance as the elementwise product between the weight magnitude and the norm of input activations (|W| · X2). Weight importance scores are compared on a per-output basis (within each row in W), rather than globally across the entire matrix.

Alistarh, 2023) finds that magnitude pruning (Han et al., 2015), a well-established pruning approach, fails dramatically on LLMs even with relatively low levels of sparsity. Considering the past success of magnitude pruning on smaller networks, this result suggests that LLMs, despite having 100 to 1000 times more parameters, are substantially more difficult to prune directly.
In this work, we address this challenge by introducing a straightforward and effective approach, termed Wanda (Pruning by Weights and activations). This technique successfully prunes LLMs to high degrees of sparsity without any need for modifying the remaining weights. We are motivated by an observation from a recent study (Dettmers et al., 2022), where a small subset of hidden state features are exceptionally large in magnitude, a property unique to LLMs. We find that augmenting the standard weight magnitude pruning metric with the input activations, is surprisingly effective as a measure for evaluating the weight importance. Specifically, we introduce a novel pruning metric, where each weight is evaluated by the product of its magnitude and the norm of the corresponding input activations, estimated using a small set of calibration data. Our method uses this metric to induce sparsity in pretrained LLMs by comparing weights locally within each output of linear layers and removing lower priority weights. Our approach is computationally efficient, able to be executed in a single forward pass, and requires minimal memory overhead.
We empirically evaluate Wanda on the widely adopted LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023a) and LLaMA2 (Touvron et al., 2023b) model families. Our results demonstrate Wanda can find efficient sparse networks from pretrained LLMs, without any retraining or weight update. Our approach Wanda outperforms the standard magnitude pruning by a large margin and also competes favorably with the prior best LLM pruning method (Frantar & Alistarh, 2023), while requiring a lower computational cost. We hope our work serves as a baseline for future work in this area, and encourages further exploration in understanding sparsity in LLMs.
2 PRELIMINARIES
Magnitude Pruning (Han et al., 2015) is a standard pruning technique to induce sparsity in neural networks. It removes individual weights based on their magnitudes, where weights with magnitudes below a certain threshold are removed. In practice, this threshold is typically determined by comparing weights locally within each layer or globally across the whole network. Despite its simplicity, magnitude pruning has been used to find extremely sparse networks (Frankle & Michael, 2019) and now stands out as a strong baseline approach (Blalock et al., 2020) for neural network sparsification.
Emergent Large Magnitude Features have been observed in Transformer-based large language models. Dettmers et al. (2022) discover that once LLMs reach a certain scale (in practice, around 6B parameters), a small set of hidden state features emerges with significantly larger magnitudes than the remaining ones. These outlier features exhibit several intriguing characteristics. First, they have very large magnitudes, about 100 times larger than typical hidden state values. Second, they are usually sparse and exist in certain feature dimensions. Finally, these outlier features are essential for the predictive capability of LLMs: zeroing out these features at inference time results in significant degradation of language modeling performance.
2

