The case for 4-bit precision: k-bit Inference Scaling Laws

arXiv:2212.09720v2 [cs.LG] 28 Feb 2023 Mean zeroshot accuracy

Tim Dettmers 1 Luke Zettlemoyer 1

Abstract
Quantization methods reduce the number of bits required to represent each parameter in a model, trading accuracy for smaller memory footprints and inference latencies. However, the final model size depends on both the number of parameters of the original model and the rate of compression. For example, a 30B 8-bit model and a 60B 4-bit model have the same number of bits but may have very different zero-shot accuracies. In this work, we study this trade-off by developing inference scaling laws of zero-shot performance in Large Language Models (LLMs) to determine the bitprecision and model size that maximizes zero-shot performance. We run more than 35,000 experiments with 16-bit inputs and k-bit parameters to examine which zero-shot quantization methods improve scaling for 3 to 8-bit precision at scales of 19M to 176B parameters across the LLM families BLOOM, OPT, NeoX/Pythia, and GPT-2. We find that it is challenging to improve the bit-level scaling trade-off, with the only improvements being the use of a small block size ­ splitting the parameters into small independently quantized blocks ­ and the quantization data type being used (e.g., Int vs Float). Overall, our findings show that 4-bit precision is almost universally optimal for total model bits and zero-shot accuracy.

1. Introduction

Large Language Models (LLMs) are widely adopted for zero/few-shot inference (Zhang et al., 2022; Black et al., 2022; Zeng et al., 2022; Scao et al., 2022), but they can be challenging to use both due to their large memory footprints ­ up to 352 GB of GPU memory for 175B models ­ and high latency. However, both the memory and latency are primarily determined by the total number of bits in the parameters. Therefore, if we reduce the model bits through

1University of Washington. <dettmers@cs.washington.edu>.

Correspondence to:

0.75 OPT
0.70

0.65

0.60

0.55

0.50 0.45 0.40 0.35 109

1010Total mode1l0b11its

Bit precision 3 4 8 16
1012

Figure 1. Bit-level scaling laws for mean zero-shot performance across four datasets for 125M to 176B parameter OPT models. Zero-shot performance increases steadily for fixed model bits as we reduce the quantization precision from 16 to 4 bits. At 3-bits, this relationship reverses, making 4-bit precision optimal.

quantization, we can expect the latency of the model to reduce proportionally, potentially at the expense of end task accuracy (Frantar et al., 2022; Park et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022).
Since we can quantize the parameters of a trained model to an arbitrary bit-precision, this raises the question of how many bits should be used to optimally trade off accuracy and total model bits, given our current base methods for model quantization. For example, if we have a 60B LLM in 4bit precision and a 30B LLM in 8-bit precision, which will achieve higher accuracy? To study such trade-offs, it is helpful to take the perspective of scaling laws (Kaplan et al., 2020; Henighan et al., 2020), which evaluate the underlying trends of variables to make generalizations beyond individual data points.
In this paper, we study bit-level inference scaling laws for zero-shot quantization to determine the precision that maximizes zero-shot accuracy given a certain number of total bits in the model. Our main finding is that 4-bit parameters yield optimal performance for a fixed number of model bits across all model scales and model families tested.
We study five different model families, OPT, Pythia/NeoX,

Bit-level Inference Scaling Laws

GPT-2, BLOOM, and BLOOMZ (Zhang et al., 2022; Black et al., 2022; Radford et al., 2019; Scao et al., 2022), with 19M to 176B parameters, and for 3 to 16-bit precision. In addition, we run more than 35,000 zero-shot experiments to vary many of the recently studied advances in quantization precision, including the underlying data types and quantization block size. We find that reducing the precision steadily from 16 to 4 bits increases the zero-shot performance for a fixed number of model bits, while at 3-bit, the zero-shot performance decreases. This relationship holds across all models studied and did not change when scaling from 19M to 176B parameters, making 4-bit quantization universally optimal across all cases tested.
Beyond this, we analyze which quantization methods improve and which degrade bit-level scaling. We find that none of the quantization methods we test improve scaling behavior for 6 to 8-bit precision. For 4-bit precision, data types and a small quantization block size are the best ways to enhance bit-level scaling trends. We find that quantile quantization and floating point data types are the most effective, while integer and dynamic exponent data types generally yield worse scaling trends. For most 4-bit models, a block size between 64 to 128 is optimal in our study.
From our results, we can make straightforward recommendations for using zero-shot quantized models for inference: always use 4-bit models with a small block size and with a float data type. If trade-offs in total model bits or predictive performance are desired, keep the precision in 4-bit but vary the number of parameters of the model instead.
While earlier work has shown that it is possible to significantly improve the predictive performance of quantized models by using outlier-dependent quantization (Dettmers et al., 2022a; Xiao et al., 2022), we show that this is not effective for bit-level scaling. In particular, we analyze instabilities in 3-bit OPT and Pythia models and show that while these models can be stabilized through an outlier-dependent quantization which we term proxy quantization, this does not improve bit-level scaling compared to 4-bit precision. On the other hand, we highlight that one-shot quantization methods, that is, methods that optimize the quantization through a single mini-batch of data, potentially could be scaled to be bit-efficient below the 4-bit level. Overall, these findings suggest that the most promising directions to improve zero-shot bit-level scaling laws are to develop new data types and techniques that quantize outliers with high precision without requiring a significant amount of additional bits. We also highlight the potential for one-shot quantization methods as a way towards low-bit transformers if combined with our insights.

2. Background
It might be unintuitive that reducing the number of bits of a model is directly related to inference latency for LLMs. The following section gives the background to understand this relationship. Afterward, we provide a background on quantization data types and methods.
2.1. Relationship between inference latency and total model bits
While the main goal of our work is to find the best trade-offs between model bits and zero-shot accuracy for LLMs, the total model bits are also strongly related to inference latency. The overall computation latency ­ the time it takes from start to finish of a computation ­ is mainly determined by two factors: (1) how long does it take to load the data from main memory into caches and registers, (2) how long does it take to perform the computation. For example, for modern hardware like GPUs, it usually takes more than 100 times longer to load a number than to do an arithmetic operation with that number (Jia et al., 2019; Dongarra, 2022). Therefore, reducing the time spent loading data from main memory is often the best way to accelerate overall computation latency. Such reductions can be achieved mainly through caching and lower precision numbers.
Caching can reduce the overall latency of matrix multiplication by a factor of 10x or more (Jia et al., 2019), given that neither matrix entirely fits into the L1 cache of the device. In matrix multiplication, bW = h, with the batch b and parameter matrix W, we load each row of b and each column of W and multiply them ­ thus multiple loads from global memory occur for each row/column which can be cached. If b entirely fits into the L1 cache, no reuse is possible because neither W nor b is loaded more than once from global memory. This occurs if the inference batch size is below 60 or 200 for an RTX 3090 or RTX 4090 GPU. As such, caching is ineffective below these batch sizes, and the inference latency is solely determined by the memory loaded from W.
Thus in the case where the mini-batch fits into the L1 cache, inference latency can be reduced by using a smaller model with smaller W or by compressing an existing model to use a lower bit-precision per parameter in W. For example, beyond their algorithmic innovation of improved rounding for quantization, Frantar et al. (2022) also developed inference CUDA kernels for 16-bit inputs and 3-bit integer weights, which yields inference latency improvements of up to 4.46x compared to 16-bit inputs and weights for OPT-175B ­ close to the 5.33x reduction in model bits. As such, reduction in the total model bits is strongly correlated with inference latency for small inference batch sizes.

