Fast Inference from Transformers via Speculative Decoding

arXiv:2211.17192v2 [cs.LG] 18 May 2023

Yaniv Leviathan * 1 Matan Kalman * 1 Yossi Matias 1

Abstract
Inference from large autoregressive models like Transformers is slow - decoding K tokens takes K serial runs of the model. In this work we introduce speculative decoding - an algorithm to sample from autoregressive models faster without any changes to the outputs, by computing several tokens in parallel. At the heart of our approach lie the observations that (1) hard language-modeling tasks often include easier subtasks that can be approximated well by more efficient models, and (2) using speculative execution and a novel sampling method, we can make exact decoding from the large models faster, by running them in parallel on the outputs of the approximation models, potentially generating several tokens concurrently, and without changing the distribution. Our method can accelerate existing off-the-shelf models without retraining or architecture changes. We demonstrate it on T5-XXL and show a 2X-3X acceleration compared to the standard T5X implementation, with identical outputs.
1. Introduction
Large autoregressive models, notably large Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), are much more capable than smaller models, as is evidenced countless times in recent years e.g., in the text or image domains, like GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020), LaMDA (Thoppilan et al., 2022), Parti (Yu et al., 2022), and PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022). Unfortunately, a single decode step from these larger models is significantly slower than a step from their smaller counterparts, and making things worse, these steps are done serially - decoding K tokens takes K serial runs of the model.
Given the importance of large autoregressive models and specifically large Transformers, several approaches were
*Equal contribution 1Google Research, Mountain View, CA, USA. Correspondence to: Yaniv Leviathan <leviathan@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright 2023 by the author(s).

developed to make inference from them faster. Some approaches aim to reduce the inference cost for all inputs equally (e.g. Hinton et al., 2015; Jaszczur et al., 2021; Hubara et al., 2016; So et al., 2021; Shazeer, 2019). Other approaches stem from the observation that not all inference steps are born alike - some require a very large model, while others can be approximated well by more efficient models. These adaptive computation methods (e.g. Han et al., 2021; Sukhbaatar et al., 2019; Schuster et al., 2021; Scardapane et al., 2020; Bapna et al., 2020; Elbayad et al., 2019; Schwartz et al., 2020) aim to use less compute resources for easier inference steps. While many of these solutions have proven extremely effective in practice, they usually require changing the model architecture, changing the training-procedure and re-training the models, and don't maintain identical outputs.
The key observation above, that some inference steps are "harder" and some are "easier", is also a key motivator for our work. We additionally observe that inference from large models is often not bottlenecked on arithmetic operations, but rather on memory bandwidth and communication, so additional computation resources might be available. Therefore we suggest increasing concurrency as a complementary approach to using an adaptive amount of computation. Specifically, we are able to accelerate inference without changing the model architectures, without changing the training-procedures or needing to re-train the models, and without changing the model output distribution. This is accomplished via speculative execution.
Speculative execution (Burton, 1985; Hennessy & Patterson, 2012) is an optimization technique, common in processors, where a task is performed in parallel to verifying if it's actually needed - the payoff being increased concurrency. A well-known example of speculative execution is branch prediction. For speculative execution to be effective, we need an efficient mechanism to suggest tasks to execute that are likely to be needed. In this work, we generalize speculative execution to the stochastic setting - where a task might be needed with some probability. Applying this to decoding from autoregressive models like Transformers, we sample generations from more efficient approximation models as speculative prefixes for the slower target models. With a novel sampling method, speculative sampling, we maximize the probability of these speculative tasks to

1

Fast Inference from Transformers via Speculative Decoding

Figure 1. Our technique illustrated in the case of unconditional language modeling. Each line represents one iteration of the algorithm. The green tokens are the suggestions made by the approximation model (here, a GPT-like Transformer decoder with 6M parameters trained on lm1b with 8k tokens) that the target model (here, a GPT-like Transformer decoder with 97M parameters in the same setting) accepted, while the red and blue tokens are the rejected suggestions and their corrections, respectively. For example, in the first line the target model was run only once, and 5 tokens were generated.

be accepted, while guaranteeing that the outputs from our system have the same distribution as those from the target model alone. For example, the sentence in Figure 1, consisting of 38 tokens, was generated by our method with only 9 serial runs of a larger target model (97M parameters) thanks to a smaller and more efficient approximation model (6M parameters), while the probability of generating it is unchanged.
We analyze our method in a variety of tasks and model sizes: unconditional generation from a 97M parameter GPTlike model trained on lm1b, English to German translation and news article summarization with an 11B parameters T5-XXL model, and a dialog task with a 137B parameter LaMDA model. We implement our method and compare actual walltimes for T5-XXL to those of the robust T5X implementation (Roberts et al., 2022), showing an out-ofthe-box latency improvement of 2X-3X, without any change to the outputs (Section 4).
Our method is easy to employ in actual production settings, doesn't require training new models, and doesn't change the outputs. Therefore, in common situations where memory bandwidth is the bottleneck, and compute resources are available, it may be a good default to accelerate sampling from autoregressive models like Transformers.
To summarize, our main contributions are: (1) A generalization of speculative execution to the stochastic setting, with a novel sampling method we call speculative sampling, and (2) A decoding mechanism we call speculative decoding that can accelerate decoding from autoregressive models, without any change to the model architectures, training regimes and output distributions.

2. Speculative Decoding
2.1. Overview
Let Mp be the target model, inference from which we're trying to accelerate, and p(xt|x<t) the distribution we get from the model for a prefix x<t. Let Mq be a more efficient approximation model for the same task, and denote by q(xt|x<t) the distribution we get from the model for a prefix x<t1. The core idea is to (1) use the more efficient model Mq to generate   Z+ completions (see Section 3.5 for how to optimally choose this parameter), then (2) use the target model Mp to evaluate all of the guesses and their respective probabilities from Mq in parallel, accepting all those that can lead to an identical distribution, and (3) sampling an additional token from an adjusted distribution to fix the first one that was rejected, or to add an additional one if they are all accepted. That way, each parallel run of the target model Mp will produce at least one new token (so the number of serial runs of the target model can never, even in the worst case, be larger than the simple autoregressive method), but it can potentially generate many new tokens, up to  + 1, depending on how well Mq approximates Mp.
2.2. Standardized Sampling
First, note that while there are many methods and parameters of sampling, like argmax, top-k, nucleus, and setting a temperature, and popular implementations usually treat them differently at the logits level, they can all easily be cast into standard sampling from an adjusted probability distribution. For example, argmax sampling is equivalent to zeroing out non-max elements of the distribution and normalizing. We can therefore only deal with standard sampling from a
1We'll use p(x) to denote p(xt|x<t) whenever the prefix x<t is clear from the context, and similarly for q(x).

2

