arXiv:1412.6575v4 [cs.CL] 29 Aug 2015

Published as conference paper at ICLR 2015
EMBEDDING ENTITIES AND RELATIONS FOR LEARNING AND INFERENCE IN KNOWLEDGE BASES
Bishan Yang1,°Wen-tau Yih2, Xiaodong He2, Jianfeng Gao2 & Li Deng2 1Department of Computer Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14850, USA bishan@cs.cornell.edu 2Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA 98052, USA {scottyih,xiaohe,jfgao,deng}@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
We consider learning representations of entities and relations in KBs using the neural-embedding approach. We show that most existing models, including NTN (Socher et al., 2013) and TransE (Bordes et al., 2013b), can be generalized under a unified learning framework, where entities are low-dimensional vectors learned from a neural network and relations are bilinear and/or linear mapping functions. Under this framework, we compare a variety of embedding models on the link prediction task. We show that a simple bilinear formulation achieves new state-of-the-art results for the task (achieving a top-10 accuracy of 73.2% vs. 54.7% by TransE on Freebase). Furthermore, we introduce a novel approach that utilizes the learned relation embeddings to mine logical rules such as BornInCitypa, bq ^ CityInCountrypb, cq ùñ N ationalitypa, cq. We find that embeddings learned from the bilinear objective are particularly good at capturing relational semantics, and that the composition of relations is characterized by matrix multiplication. More interestingly, we demonstrate that our embedding-based rule extraction approach successfully outperforms a state-ofthe-art confidence-based rule mining approach in mining Horn rules that involve compositional reasoning.
1 INTRODUCTION
Recent years have witnessed a rapid growth of knowledge bases (KBs) such as Freebase1, DBPedia (Auer et al., 2007), and YAGO (Suchanek et al., 2007). These KBs store facts about real-world entities (e.g. people, places, and things) in the form of RDF triples2 (i.e. (subject, predicate, object)). Today's KBs are large in size. For instance, Freebase contains millions of entities and billions of facts (triples) involving a large variety of predicates (relation types). Such large-scale multirelational data provide an excellent potential for improving a wide range of tasks, from information retrieval, question answering to biological data mining.
Recently, much effort has been invested in relational learning methods that can scale to large knowledge bases. Tensor factorization (e.g. (Nickel et al., 2011; 2012)) and neural-embedding-based models (e.g. (Bordes et al., 2013a;b; Socher et al., 2013)) are two popular kinds of approaches that learn to encode relational information using low-dimensional representations of entities and relations. These representation learning methods have shown good scalability and reasoning ability in terms of validating unseen facts given the existing KB.
In this work, we focus on the study of neural-embedding models, where the representations are learned using neural networks with energy-based objectives. Recent embedding models TransE (Bordes et al., 2013b) and NTN (Socher et al., 2013) have shown state-of-the-art prediction performance compared to tensor factorization methods such as RESCAL (Nickel et al., 2012). They are similar in model forms with slight differences on the choices of entity and relation representations. Without careful comparison, it is not clear how different design choices affect the
°Work conducted while interning at Microsoft Research. 1http://freebase.com 2http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf11-concepts/
1

Published as conference paper at ICLR 2015
learning results. In addition, the performance of the embedding models are evaluated on the link prediction task (i.e. predicting the correctness of unseen triples). This only indirectly shows the meaningfulness of low-dimensional embeddings. It is hard to explain what relational properties are being captured and to what extent they are captured during the embedding process.
We make three main contributions in this paper. (1) We present a general framework for multirelational learning that unifies most multi-relational embedding models developed in the past, including NTN (Socher et al., 2013) and TransE (Bordes et al., 2013b). (2) We empirically evaluate different choices of entity representations and relation representations under this framework on the canonical link prediction task and show that a simple bilinear formulation achieves new state-ofthe-art results for the task (a top-10 accuracy of 73.2% vs. 54.7% by TransE when evaluated on Freebase). (3) We propose and evaluate a novel approach that utilizes the learned embeddings to mine logical rules such as BornInCitypa, bq ^ CityOf Countrypb, cq ùñ N ationalitypa, cq. We show that such rules can be effectively extracted by modeling the composition of relation embeddings, and that the embeddings learned from the bilinear objective are particularly good at capturing the compositional semantics of relations via matrix multiplication. Furthermore, we demonstrate that our embedding-based approach outperforms a state-of-the-art rule mining system AMIE (Gala´rraga et al., 2013) on mining rules that involve compositional reasoning.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses related work. Section 3 presents the general framework for learning multi-relational representations. Sections 4 and 5 present two inference tasks: a canonical link prediction task and a novel rule extraction task where the learned embeddings are empirically evaluated. Section 6 concludes the paper.
2 RELATED WORK
Multi-relational learning has been an active research area for the past couple of years. Traditional statistical learning approaches (Getoor & Taskar, 2007) such as Markov-logic networks (Richardson & Domingos, 2006) usually suffer from scalability issues. More recently, various types of representation learning methods have been proposed to embed multi-relational knowledge into lowdimensional representations of entities and relations, including tensor/matrix factorization (Singh & Gordon, 2008; Nickel et al., 2011; 2012), Bayesian clustering framework (Kemp et al., 2006; Sutskever et al., 2009), and neural networks (Paccanaro & Hinton, 2001; Bordes et al., 2013a;b; Socher et al., 2013). Our work focuses on the study of neural-embedding models as they have shown good scalability and strong generalizability on large-scale KBs.
Existing neural embedding models (Bordes et al., 2013a;b; Socher et al., 2013) all represent entities as low-dimensional vectors and represent relations as operators that combine the representations of two entities. They differ in different parametrization of relation operators. For instance, given two entity vectors, the model of Neural Tensor Network (NTN) (Socher et al., 2013) represents each relation as a bilinear tensor operator followed by a linear matrix operator. The model of TransE (Bordes et al., 2013b), on the other hand, represents each relation as a single vector that linearly interacts with the entity vectors. Likewise, variations on entity representations also exist. Most methods represent each entity as a unit vector while NTN (Socher et al., 2013) represent entities as an average of word vectors and initializing word vectors with pre-trained vectors from external text corpora. There has not been work that closely examines the effectiveness of these different design choices.
Our work on embedding-based rule extraction presented in part of this paper is related to the earlier study on logical inference with learned continuous-space representations. Much existing work along this line focuses on learning logic-based representations for natural language sentences. For example, Socher et al. (2012) builds a neural network that recursively combines word representations based on parse tree structures and shows that such neural network can simulate the behavior of conjunction and negation. Bowman (2014) further demonstrates that recursive neural network can capture certain aspects of natural logical reasoning on examples involving quantifiers like some and all. Recently, Grefenstette (2013) shows that in theory most aspects of predicate logic can be simulated using tensor calculus. Rockta¨schel et al. (2014) further implements the idea by introducing a supervised objective that trains embeddings to be consistent with given logical rules. The evaluation was conducted on toy data and uses limited logical forms. Different from these earlier studies, we propose a novel approach to utilizing embeddings learned without explicit logical constraints to directly mine logical rules from KBs. We demonstrate that the learned embeddings of relations
2

