arXiv:2205.14135v2 [cs.LG] 23 Jun 2022

FlashAttention: Fast and Memory-Efficient Exact Attention with IO-Awareness
Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, SUNY
{trid,danfu}@cs.stanford.edu, ermon@stanford.edu, atri@buffalo.edu, chrismre@cs.stanford.edu
June 24, 2022
Abstract Transformers are slow and memory-hungry on long sequences, since the time and memory complexity of self-attention are quadratic in sequence length. Approximate attention methods have attempted to address this problem by trading off model quality to reduce the compute complexity, but often do not achieve wall-clock speedup. We argue that a missing principle is making attention algorithms IOaware--accounting for reads and writes between levels of GPU memory. We propose FlashAttention, an IO-aware exact attention algorithm that uses tiling to reduce the number of memory reads/writes between GPU high bandwidth memory (HBM) and GPU on-chip SRAM. We analyze the IO complexity of FlashAttention, showing that it requires fewer HBM accesses than standard attention, and is optimal for a range of SRAM sizes. We also extend FlashAttention to block-sparse attention, yielding an approximate attention algorithm that is faster than any existing approximate attention method. FlashAttention trains Transformers faster than existing baselines: 15% end-to-end wall-clock speedup on BERT-large (seq. length 512) compared to the MLPerf 1.1 training speed record, 3× speedup on GPT-2 (seq. length 1K), and 2.4× speedup on long-range arena (seq. length 1K-4K). FlashAttention and block-sparse FlashAttention enable longer context in Transformers, yielding higher quality models (0.7 better perplexity on GPT-2 and 6.4 points of lift on long-document classification) and entirely new capabilities: the first Transformers to achieve better-than-chance performance on the Path-X challenge (seq. length 16K, 61.4% accuracy) and Path-256 (seq. length 64K, 63.1% accuracy).
1 Introduction
Transformer models [82] have emerged as the most widely used architecture in applications such as natural language processing and image classification. Transformers have grown larger [5] and deeper [83], but equipping them with longer context remains difficult [80], since the self-attention module at their heart has time and memory complexity quadratic in sequence length. An important question is whether making attention faster and more memory-efficient can help Transformer models address their runtime and memory challenges for long sequences.
Many approximate attention methods have aimed to reduce the compute and memory requirements of attention. These methods range from sparse-approximation [51, 74] to low-rank approximation [12, 50, 84], and their combinations [3, 9, 92]. Although these methods reduce the compute requirements to linear or near-linear in sequence length, many of them do not display wall-clock speedup against standard attention and have not gained wide adoption. One main reason is that they focus on FLOP reduction (which may not correlate with wall-clock speed) and tend to ignore overheads from memory access (IO).
In this paper, we argue that a missing principle is making attention algorithms IO-aware [1]--that is, carefully accounting for reads and writes to different levels of fast and slow memory (e.g., between fast GPU on-chip SRAM and relatively slow GPU high bandwidth memory, or HBM [45], Figure 1 left). On modern
1

Inner Loop QKT: N x N
Time (ms)

KT: d x N

GPU SRAM: 19 TB/s (20 MB)
SRAM
GPU HBM: 1.5 TB/s (40 GB) HBM

Main Memory DRAM: 12.8 GB/s

(CPU DRAM)

(>1 TB)

Q: N x d Copy

Outer Loop

Copy Block to SRAM Outer Loop

V: N X d

Compute Block on SRAM

Copy

Memory Hierarchy with Bandwidth & Memory Size

sm(QKT)V: N x d

Output to HBM

Inner Loop
FlashAttention

Outer Loop Inner Loop

Attention on GPT-2

15

Matmul

Dropout

10 Softmax

5

Mask

Fused Kernel

Matmul 0

PyTorch

FlashAttention

Figure 1: Left: FlashAttention uses tiling to prevent materialization of the large  ×  attention matrix (dotted box) on (relatively) slow GPU HBM. In the outer loop (red arrows), FlashAttention loops through blocks of the K and V matrices and loads them to fast on-chip SRAM. In each block, FlashAttention loops over blocks of Q matrix (blue arrows), loading them to SRAM, and writing the output of the attention computation back to HBM. Right: Speedup over the PyTorch implementation of attention on GPT-2. FlashAttention does not read and write the large  ×  attention matrix to HBM, resulting in an 7.6× speedup on the attention computation.

GPUs, compute speed has out-paced memory speed [61, 62, 63], and most operations in Transformers are bottlenecked by memory accesses [43]. IO-aware algorithms have been critical for similar memory-bound operations, when reading and writing data can account for a large portion of the runtime--such as database joins [71], image processing [70], numerical linear algebra [4], and more [40, 85]. However, common Python interfaces to deep learning such as PyTorch and Tensorflow do not allow fine-grained control of memory access.
We propose FlashAttention, a new attention algorithm that computes exact attention with far fewer memory accesses. Our main goal is to avoid reading and writing the attention matrix to and from HBM. This requires (i) computing the softmax reduction without access to the whole input (ii) not storing the large intermediate attention matrix for the backward pass. We apply two well-established techniques to address these challenges. (i) We restructure the attention computation to split the input into blocks and make several passes over input blocks, thus incrementally performing the softmax reduction (also known as tiling). (ii) We store the softmax normalization factor from the forward pass to quickly recompute attention on-chip in the backward pass, which is faster than the standard approach of reading the intermediate attention matrix from HBM. We implement FlashAttention in CUDA to achieve fine-grained control over memory access and fuse all the attention operations into one GPU kernel. Even with the increased FLOPs due to recomputation, our algorithm both runs faster (up to 7.6x on GPT-2 [67], Figure 1 right) and uses less memory--linear in sequence length--than standard attention, thanks to the massively reduced amount of HBM access.
We analyze the IO complexity [1] of FlashAttention, proving that it requires  (22 -1) HBM accesses where  is the head dimension and  is the size of SRAM, as compared to (  + 2) of standard attention. For typical values of  and , FlashAttention requires many times fewer HBM accesses compared to standard attention (up to 9× fewer, as shown in Fig. 2). Moreover, we provide a lower bound, showing that no exact attention algorithm can asymptotically improve on the number of HBM accesses over all SRAM sizes.
We also show that FlashAttention can serve as a useful primitive for realizing the potential of approximate attention algorithms by overcoming their issues with memory access overhead. As a proof of concept, we implement block-sparse FlashAttention, a sparse attention algorithm that is 2-4× faster than even FlashAttention, scaling up to sequence length of 64k. We prove that block-sparse FlashAttention has better IO complexity than FlashAttention by a factor proportional to the sparsity ratio. We discuss further extensions to other operations (attention on multi-GPU, kernel regression, block-sparse matrix

2

