MEDUSA: Simple LLM Inference Acceleration Framework with Multiple Decoding Heads

arXiv:2401.10774v3 [cs.LG] 14 Jun 2024

Tianle Cai * 1 2 Yuhong Li * 3 Zhengyang Geng 4 Hongwu Peng 5 Jason D. Lee 1 Deming Chen 3 Tri Dao 1 2

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) employ autoregressive decoding that requires sequential computation, with each step reliant on the previous one's output. This creates a bottleneck as each step necessitates moving the full model parameters from High-Bandwidth Memory (HBM) to the accelerator's cache. While methods such as speculative decoding have been suggested to address this issue, their implementation is impeded by the challenges associated with acquiring and maintaining a separate draft model. In this paper, we present MEDUSA, an efficient method that augments LLM inference by adding extra decoding heads to predict multiple subsequent tokens in parallel. Using a tree-based attention mechanism, MEDUSA constructs multiple candidate continuations and verifies them simultaneously in each decoding step. By leveraging parallel processing, MEDUSA substantially reduces the number of decoding steps required. We present two levels of fine-tuning procedures for MEDUSA to meet the needs of different use cases: MEDUSA-1: MEDUSA is directly fine-tuned on top of a frozen backbone LLM, enabling lossless inference acceleration. MEDUSA-2: MEDUSA is fine-tuned together with the backbone LLM, enabling better prediction accuracy of MEDUSA heads and higher speedup but needing a special training recipe that preserves the model's capabilities. Moreover, we propose several extensions that improve or expand the utility of MEDUSA, including a self-distillation to handle situations where no training data is available and a typical acceptance scheme to boost the acceptance rate while maintaining generation quality. We evaluate
*Equal contribution 1Princeton University 2Together AI 3University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 4Carnegie Mellon University 5University of Connecticut. Correspondence to: Tianle Cai <tianle.cai@princeton.edu>, Yuhong Li <leeyh@illinois.edu>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by the author(s).

MEDUSA on models of various sizes and training procedures. Our experiments demonstrate that MEDUSA-1 can achieve over 2.2× speedup without compromising generation quality, while MEDUSA-2 further improves the speedup to 2.32.8×.
1. Introduction
The recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated that the quality of language generation significantly improves with an increase in model size, reaching billions of parameters (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022; Hoffmann et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023; Google, 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). However, this growth has led to an increase in inference latency, which poses a significant challenge in practical applications. From a system perspective, LLM inference is predominantly memory-bandwidth-bound (Shazeer, 2019; Kim et al., 2023), with the main latency bottleneck stemming from accelerators' memory bandwidth rather than arithmetic computations. This bottleneck is inherent to the sequential nature of auto-regressive decoding, where each forward pass requires transferring the complete model parameters from High-Bandwidth Memory (HBM) to the accelerator's cache. This process, which generates only a single token, underutilizes the arithmetic computation potential of modern accelerators, leading to inefficiency.
To address this, one approach to speed up LLM inference involves increasing the arithmetic intensity (the ratio of total floating-point operations (FLOPs) to total data movement) of the decoding process and reducing the number of decoding steps. In line with this idea, speculative decoding has been proposed (Leviathan et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Xia et al., 2023; Miao et al., 2023). This method uses a smaller draft model to generate a token sequence, which is then refined by the original, larger model for acceptable continuation. However, obtaining an appropriate draft model remains challenging, and it's even harder to integrate the draft model into a distributed system (Chen et al., 2023).
Instead of using a separate draft model to sequentially generate candidate outputs, in this paper, we revisit and re-

1

MEDUSA: Simple LLM Inference Acceleration Framework with Multiple Decoding Heads

fine the concept of using multiple decoding heads on top of the backbone model to expedite inference (Stern et al., 2018). We find that when applied effectively, this technique can overcome the challenges of speculative decoding, allowing for seamless integration into existing LLM systems. Specifically, we introduce MEDUSA, a method that enhances LLM inference by integrating additional decoding heads to concurrently predict multiple tokens. These heads are fine-tuned in a parameter-efficient manner and can be added to any existing model. With no requirement for a draft model, MEDUSA offers easy integration into current LLM systems, including those in distributed environments, ensuring a user-friendly experience.
We further enhance MEDUSA with two key insights. Firstly, the current approach of generating a single candidate continuation at each decoding step leads to inefficient use of computational resources. To address this, we propose generating multiple candidate continuations using the MEDUSA heads and verifying them concurrently through a simple adjustment to the attention mask. Secondly, we can reuse the rejection sampling scheme as used in speculative decoding (Leviathan et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023) to generate consistent responses with the same distribution as the original model. However, it cannot further enhance the acceleration rate. Alternatively, we introduce a typical acceptance scheme that selects reasonable candidates from the MEDUSA head outputs. We use temperature as a threshold to manage deviation from the original model's predictions, providing an efficient alternative to the rejection sampling method. Our results suggest that the proposed typical acceptance scheme can accelerate the decoding speed further while maintaining a similar generation quality.
To equip LLMs with predictive MEDUSA heads, we propose two distinct fine-tuning procedures tailored to various scenarios. For situations with limited computational resources or when the objective is to incorporate MEDUSA into an existing model without affecting its performance, we recommend MEDUSA-1. This method requires minimal memory and can be further optimized with quantization techniques akin to those in QLoRA (Dettmers et al., 2023), without compromising the generation quality due to the fixed backbone model. However, in MEDUSA-1, the full potential of the backbone model is not utilized. We can further fine-tune it to enhance the prediction accuracy of MEDUSA heads, which can directly lead to a greater speedup. Therefore, we introduce MEDUSA-2, which is suitable for scenarios with ample computational resources or for direct Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) from a base model. The key to MEDUSA-2 is a training protocol that enables joint training of the MEDUSA heads and the backbone model without compromising the model's next-token prediction capability and output quality. We propose different strategies for obtaining the training datasets depending on the model's

training recipe and dataset availability. When the model is fine-tuned on a public dataset, it can be directly used for MEDUSA. If the dataset is unavailable or the model underwent a Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback (RLHF) (Ouyang et al., 2022) process, we suggest a selfdistillation approach to generate a training dataset for the MEDUSA heads.
Our experiments primarily focus on scenarios with a batch size of one, which is representative of the use case where LLMs are locally hosted for personal use. We test MEDUSA on models of varying sizes and training settings, including Vicuna-7B, 13B (trained with a public dataset), Vicuna33B (Chiang et al., 2023) (trained with a private dataset1), and Zephyr-7B (trained with both supervised fine-tuning and alignment). MEDUSA can achieve a speedup of 2.3 to 2.8 times across different prompt types without compromising on the quality of generation.

/
Original Model LM Head
Last Hidden Transformer
Layers
Embedding

Medusa Heads
Medusa Head 1 Medusa Head 2 Medusa Head 3

Top-k Predictions
It, I, As
is, ', the difficult, is, ' not, difficult, a

Input
What will happen if Medusa meets a llama?

Candidates  It is difficult not  It' difficult a  It is' not ...

Single step prediction
It is difficult

Figure 1. MEDUSA introduces multiple heads on top of the last hidden states of the LLM, enabling the prediction of several subsequent tokens in parallel (Section 2.1.1). During inference, each head generates multiple top predictions for its designated position. These predictions are assembled into candidates, which are processed in parallel using a tree-based attention mechanism (Section 2.1.2). The final step is to verify the candidates and accept a continuation. Besides the standard rejection sampling scheme, a typical acceptance scheme (Section 2.3.1) can also be used here to select reasonable continuations, and the longest accepted candidate prefix will be used for the next decoding phase.

2. Methodology
MEDUSA follows the same framework as speculative decoding, where each decoding step primarily consists of three substeps: (1) generating candidates, (2) processing candidates, and (3) accepting candidates. For MEDUSA, (1) is
1Upon contacting the authors, this version is experimental and used some different data than Vicuna 7B and 13B.

2

