QuIP: 2-Bit Quantization of Large Language Models With Guarantees

arXiv:2307.13304v2 [cs.LG] 15 Jan 2024

Jerry Chee Cornell University jerrychee@cs.cornell.edu
Volodymyr Kuleshov Cornell University
kuleshov@cornell.edu

Yaohui Cai Cornell University yc2632@cornell.edu
Christopher De Sa Cornell University cdesa@cs.cornell.edu

Abstract
This work studies post-training parameter quantization in large language models (LLMs). We introduce quantization with incoherence processing (QuIP), a new method based on the insight that quantization benefits from incoherent weight and Hessian matrices, i.e., from the weights being even in magnitude and the directions in which it is important to round them accurately being unaligned with the coordinate axes. QuIP consists of two steps: (1) an adaptive rounding procedure minimizing a quadratic proxy objective; (2) efficient pre- and post-processing that ensures weight and Hessian incoherence via multiplication by random orthogonal matrices. We complement QuIP with the first theoretical analysis for an LLM-scale quantization algorithm, and show that our theory also applies to an existing method, OPTQ. Empirically, we find that our incoherence preprocessing improves several existing quantization algorithms and yields the first LLM quantization methods that produce viable results using only two bits per weight. Our code can be found at https://github.com/Cornell-RelaxML/QuIP.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have enabled advances in text generation, few-shot learning, reasoning, protein sequence modeling, and other tasks [2, 30, 35]. The massive size of these models--often reaching into hundreds of billions of parameters--requires sophisticated deployment methods and motivates research into efficient inference algorithms.
This work studies the post-training quantization of LLM parameters as a way to improve their runtime efficiency [4, 8, 22, 31, 33, 34]. Our key insight is that quantization can be most effective when weight and proxy Hessian matrices are incoherent--that the weights themselves are even in magnitude, and the directions in which it is important to have good rounding accuracy are not too large in any one coordinate. Intuitively, incoherence can be thought of as a principled form of outlier reduction, which makes it easier to adaptively round the weights to a finite set of compressed values. We use this intuition to develop theoretically sound two-bit quantization algorithms that scale to LLM-sized models.
Specifically, we introduce quantization with incoherence processing (QuIP), a new method motivated by the above insight. QuIP consists of two steps: (1) an adaptive rounding [20] procedure, which minimizes a quadratic proxy objective (W^ ) = tr((W^ - W )H(W^ - W )T ) of the error between the original weights W and the quantized weights W^ using an estimate of the Hessian H; (2) efficient preand post- processing that ensures that the weight and Hessian matrices are incoherent by multiplying
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).

them by a Kronecker product of random orthogonal matrices. We denote "incoherence processing" as both the pre- and post- processing steps of our procedure. Incoherence processing can be viewed as a form of outlier suppression across the weights and the activation space.
We complement our method with a theoretical analysis--the first for a quantization algorithm that scales to LLM-sized models--which analyzes the role of incoherence and shows that our quantization procedure is optimal within a general class of rounding methods. Interestingly, we find that QuIP without incoherence processing yields a more efficient implementation of an earlier algorithm, OPTQ [8]; our paper thus also provides the first theoretical analysis for that method.
Empirically, we find that incoherence processing greatly improves the quantization of large models, especially at higher compression rates, and yields the first LLM quantization method that produces viable results using only two bits per weight. For large LLM sizes (>2B parameters), we observe small gaps between 2-bit and 4-bit compression that further decrease with model size, hinting at the feasibility of accurate 2-bit inference in LLMs.
Contributions. In summary, this paper makes the following contributions: (1) we propose QuIP, a quantization method based on the insight that model parameters should ideally be incoherent; (2) we provide a theoretical analysis for a broad class of adaptive rounding methods that encompass QuIP and OPTQ; (3) we demonstrate that QuIP makes two-bit LLM compression viable for the first time.

2 Related Work
Adaptive rounding. Nagel et al. [20] are the first to motivate the "adaptive rounding" proxy objective (Eq. (1)) in a principled way. There are many quantization methods which quantize by optimizing this proxy objective [5, 6, 9, 12, 14, 20, 32]. Many require further retraining which can be expensive, and are not evaluated on the current largest open LLMs (OPT [35], BLOOM [30]). Lybrand and Saab [15] propose a greedy per-neuron quantization procedure that is similar to ours, except they do not consider arbitrary linear functions of the error correction. Their work bounds the proxy objective, albeit on the first layer only.
Post training quantization in large models. There is a growing body of work on PTQ in LLMs such as OPT and BLOOM. The size of these models make it difficult to apply previously developed methods. The majority of these methods make quantization easier by somehow reducing the range of weights or activations, but still use nearest rounding. SmoothQuant [31] rescales between activations and weights to remove outliers from the activations and make quantization overall easier. ZeroQuant [33] proposes a per-layer knowledge distillation method. LLM.int8() [4] decompose matrix multiplications into a majority of 8 bit and a minority of 16 bit operations. LUT-GEMM [22] designs kernels to accelerate quantized matrix multiplications. RPTQ [34] reorders activations and quantizes them in groups, reducing the impact of range differences between channels.
OPTQ (Formerly known as GPTQ). OPTQ [8] is based on OBQ [7], and proposes a novel rounding method that can work on the largest OPT and BLOOM models. The method works iteratively over the weight columns in a fixed order: (1) quantize with nearest rounding and compute the error, (2) update the remaining weights with a scaled error, and (3) repeat.
Other quantization methods. There are other quantization procedures which do not round based on the proxy objective of [20], or are not designed for the largest language models [10, 11, 13, 19, 28, 29].

3 Quantization With Incoherence Processing: Adaptive Rounding Step

This section introduces quantization with incoherence processing (QuIP), a new method consisting of: (1) an adaptive rounding step; (2) efficient pre- and post-processing that ensures weight and Hessian incoherence. We define and analyze step (1) in this section; the next section focuses on step (2).
Following existing state-of-the-art post-training quantization methods, we round weights per-layer by minimizing the "adaptive rounding" proxy objective, as in Nagel et al. [20],

2

(W^ ) = Ex (W^ - W )x = tr (W^ - W )H(W^ - W )T .

(1)

2

