Accelerating LLM Inference with Staged Speculative Decoding

arXiv:2308.04623v1 [cs.AI] 8 Aug 2023

Benjamin Spector 1 Chris Re 1

Abstract
Recent advances with large language models (LLM) illustrate their diverse capabilities. We propose a novel algorithm, staged speculative decoding, to accelerate LLM inference in smallbatch, on-device scenarios. We address the low arithmetic intensity of small-batch inference by improving upon previous work in speculative decoding. First, we restructure the speculative batch as a tree, which reduces generation costs and increases the expected tokens per batch. Second, we add a second stage of speculative decoding. Taken together, we reduce single-batch decoding latency by 3.16x with a 762M parameter GPT-2-L model while perfectly preserving output quality.
1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have witnessed tremendous growth over the last few years, demonstrating capabilities that range from high-quality text generation to complex reasoning, decision-making, and problem-solving tasks (Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023; Chowdhery et al., 2022). These strides, enabled by advances in deep learning architectures (Vaswani et al., 2017), training methodologies (Kingma & Ba, 2014), and vast amounts of data (Halevy et al., 2009; Gao et al., 2020; Kocetkov et al., 2022), have paved the way for applications in fields as varied as natural language processing (Brown et al., 2020), machine translation (Raffel et al., 2020), code synthesis (Chen et al., 2021), and beyond (OpenAI, 2023).
However, this exciting progress comes with its own set of system-level challenges. As LLMs have become more powerful, their computational demands have increased in tandem, often requiring substantial cloud resources for inference (Sheng et al., 2023). This requirement is prohibitive for many potential applications, especially those requiring
1Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, California, United States. Correspondence to: Benjamin Spector <bfs@stanford.edu>.
Proceedings of the 40 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. PMLR 202, 2023. Copyright 2023 by the author(s).

low-latency responses (Wang et al., 2023) or those where data privacy is paramount (Carlini et al., 2021).
Our paper addresses these challenges by accelerating local (small-batch) inference for LLMs, which suffers from poor compute utilization due to its low arithmetic intensity. We view this problem as crucial for three reasons: latency, personalization, and privacy. First, optimizing local inference latency improves real-time interactivity and responsiveness. Accelerating local inference also opens the door for more personalized LLM experiences as it allows models to be locally tailored to individual users. Finally, local inference enhances data privacy, as it removes the need for data to leave the user's device.
More philosophically, we believe that methods to efficiently run LLMs locally promote AI democratization by empowering individuals with limited computational resources.
In this work, we build on the speculative decoding techniques introduced by (Leviathan et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023), which use a fast but inaccurate draft model to anticipate the oracle model and batch queries to it, which improves sequential decoding performance while perfectly retaining the model distribution. These techniques scale well at first but their performance gains quickly saturate, because the probability of a draft model correctly guessing many sequential tokens is exponentially small. We improve speculative methods in two key ways:
1. We restructure the speculative batch as a tree of possible token sequences, so as to more quickly create larger and higher quality speculative batches.
2. We speculatively decode the draft model, too, to further improve performance.
We find these techniques significantly improve the performance of speculative decoding in both deterministic and sampling-based decoding.
2. Background
In this section, we provide a brief overview of autoregressive LLM inference, key principles of GPU performance optimization, and prior work in optimizing LLM inference.

1

Submission and Formatting Instructions for ICML 2023

2.1. Autoregressive LLM Inference
Autoregressive generation from decoder-only LLMs is generally split into two phases. First, the prompt is run through the model to generate the KV cache and the first output logits. This is usually fast, as the entire prompt can be handled in parallel.
The second phase is decoding. A token is selected from the outputted logits and fed back into the model, which produces logits for the following token. This is repeated until the desired number of tokens is produced. Because decoding must be done sequentially, with the entire model's weights streamed through the compute units each time in order to generate a single token, the arithmetic intensity (that is, FLOP of compute / byte of memory bandwidth) of this second phase is extremely low when run in small batches. As such, decoding is usually the most expensive part of autoregressive generation. (Leviathan et al., 2022)
2.2. GPU optimization
Modern LLM inference is most often conducted on GPUs due to the highly parallel nature of the workload, which consists principally of large matrix multiplications.
GPUs consist of thousands of extremely small efficient cores supported by a multi-level memory hierarchy. The key challenge of optimizing small-batch LLM inference for GPUs is to deal with the extremely low arithmetic intensity. Operating in 16-bit precision with a batch size of 1, decoding has an arithmetic intensity of 1. For example, for a reference PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019) implementation of GPT-2 Large (762M parameters), inference requires approximately 1.4 GFLOP, and yet a quiesced NVIDIA RTX 4090 achieves only 150 tokens/second, for a compute utilization of a mere 0.13% (NVIDIA, 2022). This abysmal performance is substantially due to the GPU roofline (Ofenbeck et al., 2014), which is governed by memory bandwidth at low arithmetic intensities (visualized in Figure 1).
2.3. Speculative Decoding
There are many techniques under investigation today to accelerate inference, such as quantization (Dettmers et al., 2022; Frantar et al., 2022), flash attention (Dao et al., 2022), and speculative decoding (Leviathan et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023). In this section, we'll briefly examine speculative decoding as described in (Leviathan et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023), as it is the primary subject of this work.
The basic idea of speculative decoding is to use a smaller, faster draft model to decode several tokens in advance, and then feeds them into the oracle model as a single batch. If the draft model was right about its predictions ­ the larger model agrees ­ one can decode several tokens with a single

Figure 1: A roofline plot for single-query GPT-2-L inference on an RTX 4090. At small batch sizes, inference is completely memory bandwidth bound. Thus this plot shows that the only way to significantly increase performance is to increase the arithmetic intensity of inference.
batch, which saves considerable memory bandwidth, and thus time, per token. However, if the larger model rejects the tokens predicted by the draft model, then the rest of the batch is discarded and the algorithm naturally reverts to standard token-by-token decoding. Speculative decoding may also be accompanied by a rejection sampling scheme to sample from the original distribution. Note this is only useful in small-batch settings where bandwidth is the bottleneck. Speculative decoding trades compute for bandwidth.
There are two key reasons why speculative decoding is an attractive performance engineering target. First, it does not degrade model quality at all. Second, the gains it provides are generally orthogonal to other methods, because its performance comes from converting sequential execution to parallel execution. (Leviathan et al., 2022)
3. Methods
We make two improvements to speculative decoding: treestructured batches, and additional stages. We term the combination of these methods "staged speculative decoding".
3.1. Tree-structured batches
Current speculative methods predict a single sequence for the batch. However, this doesn't scale well to large batch sizes or low draft model alignments. Intuitively, the probability that two models agree for long consecutive sequences of tokens is exponentially low, which means that speculative decoding has rapidly diminishing returns as one scales its arithmetic intensity.

2

