DeepSpeed Inference: Enabling Efficient Inference of Transformer Models at Unprecedented Scale

arXiv:2207.00032v1 [cs.LG] 30 Jun 2022

Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Samyam Rajbhandari, Minjia Zhang, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Cheng Li, Du Li, Elton Zheng, Jeff Rasley, Shaden Smith, Olatunji Ruwase, Yuxiong He
Microsoft Corporation {yazdani.reza,samyamr,minjiaz,ammar.awan,chengli1,du.li,elton.zheng,jeff.rasley,shaden.smith,olruwase,yuxhe}@microsoft.com

Abstract--The past several years have witnessed the success of transformer-based models, and their scale and application scenarios continue to grow aggressively. The current landscape of transformer models is increasingly diverse: the model size varies drastically with the largest being of hundred-billion parameters; the model characteristics differ due to the sparsity introduced by the Mixture-of-Experts; the target application scenarios can be latency-critical or throughput-oriented; the deployment hardware could be single- or multi-GPU systems with different types of memory and storage, etc. With such increasing diversity and the fast-evolving pace of transformer models, designing a highly performant and efficient inference system is extremely challenging.
In this paper, we present DeepSpeed Inference, a comprehensive system solution for transformer model inference to address the above-mentioned challenges. DeepSpeed Inference consists of (1) a multi-GPU inference solution to minimize latency while maximizing the throughput of both dense and sparse transformer models when they fit in aggregate GPU memory, and (2) a heterogeneous inference solution that leverages CPU and NVMe memory in addition to the GPU memory and compute to enable high inference throughput with large models which do not fit in aggregate GPU memory.
DeepSpeed Inference reduces latency by up to 7.3× over the state-of-the-art for latency oriented scenarios and increases throughput by over 1.5x for throughput oriented scenarios. Moreover, it enables trillion parameter scale inference under real-time latency constraints by leveraging hundreds of GPUs, an unprecedented scale for inference. It can inference 25× larger models than with GPU-only solutions, while delivering a high throughput of 84 TFLOPS (over 50% of A6000 peak).
I. INTRODUCTION
The past several years have witnessed the success of
transformer-based models; their scale and application scenarios
continue to grow aggressively. The current landscape of
transformer models is increasingly diverse: the model size
varies drastically with the largest being over trillion parameters;
the model characteristics differ due to the sparsity introduced
by the Mixture-of-Experts technique; the target application
scenarios can be latency-critical or throughput-oriented; the
deployment hardware could be single- or multi-GPU systems
with different types of memory and storage, etc. With such
increasing diversity and the fast-evolving pace of transformer
models, designing a highly performant and efficient inference
system is extremely challenging. Latency Challenges: Using a transformer based model
for online scenarios in production requires meeting stringent

latency requirements, and thus the batch sizes used are generally small. For small batch sizes, inference latency of a model is lower bounded by the time it takes to load all the model parameters from memory to registers. Meeting the latency requirements of a transformer model inference therefore is equivalent to achieving adequate overall memory bandwidth.
Maximizing effective memory bandwidth at small batch sizes requires reading memory at near peak memory bandwidth for fully-connected (or, linear) layers which contain the majority of the model weights, while also minimizing kernel launch and data movement overhead of other operators like layernorm and softmax. The GeMM implementations and other kernels designed for training primarily focus on maximizing compute utilization at very large batch sizes and are sub-optimal for latency-critical inference.
In addition, for large models, even the peak memory bandwidth of a single device may not be sufficient to meet inference latency constraints. It requires aggregate memory bandwidth across multiple devices, which needs optimal parallelism strategies for partitioning the model computation across devices that minimizes the communication overhead across devices. Such parallelism strategies must cater to the variation in transformer architecture and hardware characteristics.
With respect to transformer architectures, we view them in two broad categories -- dense or sparse Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) transformer models. The optimal parallelism strategy depends on the model architecture. For example, tensor and pipeline parallelism work only for dense transformers, while expert parallelism only works for sparse transformers. Moreover, transformer-based MoE models contain both dense and sparse transformer components, requiring a combination of different parallelism techniques to maximize the effective memory bandwidth across devices. Finally, with respect to hardware characteristics, modern clusters have heterogeneous network topology (eg. intra-node NVLink/NVSwitch and internode InfiniBand) which requires further consideration when developing parallelism strategies.
Throughput Challenges: In addition to meeting latency, production workloads also have throughput targets to meet cost budget. At small batch sizes, where the workload is still memory bandwidth bound, the latency of the workload does not increase as long as the computation is entirely overlapped with model weight reads. Therefore, maximizing throughput while

meeting the latency SLA requires not only maximizing the memory bandwidth utilization, but also overlapping compute with the model weight reads, and at the same time achieving high compute efficiency at small batch sizes to maximize the batch size whose compute can be overlapped with reading the model weights. Inference kernels must therefore achieve high memory bandwidth utilization and high compute utilization at small batch sizes, whereas training kernels simply need to achieve high compute utilization at much larger batch sizes. This makes developing inference kernels quite challenging.
Moreover, even for throughput bound scenarios with large batch sizes, inference workloads can differ from training workloads in terms of data flow and computation dependencies, requiring novel solutions to achieve high throughput. For example, generative transformers have dependencies between each generated token and the next token, which does not exist during training. As a result, it incurs higher memory requirement during inference to keep track of previously generated states. For large models that may require pipeline parallelism to fit the model in memory, this dependency across generated tokens also requires new pipeline schedules to keep all devices busy compared to training scenarios.
Feasibility Challenges under Limited Resources: A model with tens of billions of parameters is simply too large to fit in the memory of a single GPU device, and at hundreds of billions of parameters, it is too large to even fit in the aggregate GPU memory of a single node. For example, inferencing MTNLG 530B [1] requires about 1TB of GPU memory just to fit the model for inference, requiring over three DGX-2 nodes consisting over two dozen of NVIDIA A100 40GB GPUs. Most data scientists simply do not have access to such GPU resources needed for inference of these massive models.
In this paper, we present DeepSpeed Inference, a comprehensive solution for transformer model inference designed to address the above challenges. DeepSpeed Inference consists of two components:
1) DeepSpeed Transformer: DeepSpeed Transformer, is a GPU only solution, designed to minimize latency while maximizing throughput for both dense and sparse transformer models. It achieves state-of-art latency and throughput for transformer models of all sizes and supports running on a single GPU or scaling to hundreds of GPUs to inference multitrillion parameter models.
The DeepSpeed Transformer solution is a three-layered system architecture consisting of i) single GPU transformer kernels optimized for memory bandwidth utilization at low batch sizes and high throughput at large batch sizes, ii) many-GPU dense transformer layer, for scaling dense transformer models across GPUs using tensor-slicing and inference-optimized pipeline parallelism, and iii) massive-GPU scale sparse transformer layer, designed to scale MoE transformer layers to hundreds of GPUs using a combination of parallelism techniques and communication optimization strategies, while also minimizing single GPU sparse computation overhead using optimized sparse kernels.
By taking this layered approach, where each layer addresses

a unique aspect of the latency challenge: batch size, scaling dense models, and scaling sparse models, but are compatible and built on top of each other, we create a comprehensive system capable of achieving state-of-art latency and throughput at unprecedented scales for both dense and sparse transformer models despite the heterogeneity in batch size, model scale and model characteristics.
2) ZeRO-Inference: ZeRO-Inference is a heterogeneous GPU+CPU+NVMe based solution to address the memory challenge by enabling massive model inference with minimal GPU resources. In contrast to DeepSpeed Transformer, for applications that are less latency sensitive but resource constrained, ZeRO-Inference allows inference of models with hundreds of billions of parameters on a single or multiple GPUs as long as there is enough CPU or NVMe memory to store the model parameters. In addition, even when the model does fit in aggregate GPU memory, ZeRO-Inference delivers better per GPU efficiency than DeepSpeed Transformer by supporting much larger batch sizes.
The main contributions of the paper are as follows: · Single GPU transformer kernels for minimizing la-
tency and maximizing throughput via memory-bandwidthcentric fusion schedules and GeMM kernels (Sec. III). · A many-GPU dense transformer inference system that combines tensor-parallelism to minimize latency with inference optimized pipeline parallelism schedules and memory optimizations to maximize throughput (Sec. IV). · A massive-GPU sparse model inference system that combines: i) expert, data, and tensor parallelism, ii) novel communication optimizations and iii) sparse kernel optimizations to scale sparse inference on trillions of parameters across hundreds of GPUs (Sec. V). · ZeRO-Inference that leverages CPU, NVMe and GPU memory along with GPU compute to make massive model inference accessible with limited resources (Sec. VI). · Extensive evaluation of DeepSpeed Inference on a wide range of transformer models covering four aspects: i) For latency sensitive scenarios, DeepSpeed Transformer shows latency reduction over state-of-the-art of up to 1.9× for dense models (up to 175B parameters) and 7.2× for sparse models (a 1T model under 25 ms), while scaling to 256 GPUs at 33% peak memory bandwidth utilization, an unprecedented scale for inference. ii) For throughput oriented scenarios, DeepSpeed Transformer demonstrates over 1.5× gain over state-of-the-art (Sec. VII-C). iii) Evaluation of ZeRO-Inference on GPU resource constrained systems that shows ZeRO-Inference can support inference with 25× larger models than with GPU only solution while achieving over 50% of peak hardware performance. (Sec. VII-D). iv) Performance analysis and breakdown of the different optimizations discussed throughout the paper (Sec. VII-E). Despite the diversity in transformer inference landscape, DeepSpeed Inference offers a versatile solution capable of achieving state-of-art latency and throughput for all variations of transformer model inference: dense or sparse, small or

