LiDAR-MIMO: Efficient Uncertainty Estimation for LiDAR-based 3D Object Detection
Matthew Pitropov1, Chengjie Huang2, Vahdat Abdelzad1, Krzysztof Czarnecki1, and Steven Waslander3

arXiv:2206.00214v1 [cs.CV] 1 Jun 2022 Performance (mAP)

Abstract-- The estimation of uncertainty in robotic vision, such as 3D object detection, is an essential component in developing safe autonomous systems aware of their own performance. However, the deployment of current uncertainty estimation methods in 3D object detection remains challenging due to timing and computational constraints. To tackle this issue, we propose LiDAR-MIMO, an adaptation of the multiinput multi-output (MIMO) uncertainty estimation method to the LiDAR-based 3D object detection task. Our method modifies the original MIMO by performing multi-input at the feature level to ensure the detection, uncertainty estimation, and runtime performance benefits are retained despite the limited capacity of the underlying detector and the large computational costs of point cloud processing. We compare LiDAR-MIMO with MC dropout and ensembles as baselines and show comparable uncertainty estimation results with only a small number of output heads. Further, LiDAR-MIMO can be configured to be twice as fast as MC dropout and ensembles, while achieving higher mAP than MC dropout and approaching that of ensembles.
I. INTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are currently indispensable for implementing perception in robotics, including autonomous vehicles. Since perception is inherently uncertain, real-time and reliable estimation of perceptual uncertainty is essential for the safe operation of such systems. Object detectors based on DNNs produce a confidence score, e.g., max softmax, for each detection. However, such scores are inaccurate estimates of the actual probability of perception errors, that is, predictive uncertainty [1].
Bayesian Neural Networks (BNNs) [2] are a disciplined approach to provide accurate estimates of uncertainty. The key idea of BNNs is to place a prior probability distribution over the network parameters and use Bayesian inference to determine a posterior. Bayesian inference is computationally expensive and intractable for the large network sizes used in autonomous driving perception tasks such as object detection. Thus, much of the current work has focused on approximations that provide uncertainty estimates with a reasonable computation cost. Deep ensembles [3] and Monte Carlo (MC) dropout [4] are well established approximation methods and have also been applied to object detection [5], [6]. The key idea is to sample multiple models from an approximation of the posterior distribution and compute
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Canada. Contacts: matthew.pitropov@uwaterloo.ca, vahdat.abdelzad@uwaterloo.ca, krzysztof.czarnecki@uwaterloo.ca
2David R. Cheriton School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Canada. Contact: c.huang@uwaterloo.ca
3University of Toronto Robotics Institute, Canada. Contact: steven.waslander@utoronto.ca

68 Ensemble (4)
67

66

Ensemble (2)

65

MIMO-BEV (2)

64

63 Baseline 62

MC Dropout (4)

61

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100 110 120

Execution time (ms)

Fig. 1. The detection performance (mAP) compared to the inference time (execution time) for different uncertainty estimation methods (including baseline and proposed one in red) of the PointPillars model trained on the KITTI dataset. The number inside parentheses for the ensemble indicates the number of instances used for uncertainty estimation.

uncertainty as a statistic over their outputs (e.g., variance of the outputs). The need to perform multiple network passes makes these methods computationally expensive and thus challenging to deploy in constrained real-time environments such as autonomous vehicles.
To address this challenge, we propose LiDAR-MIMO, an adaptation of the multi-input multi-output (MIMO) uncertainty estimation method [7] to the task of 3D object detection in LiDAR point clouds. MIMO is a method shown to provide state-of-the-art uncertainty estimates in image classification, but at a fraction of the computational cost of the existing methods. The key idea behind the MIMO method is to train a single network with multiple inputs and outputs (one per input) and then feed a single image in multiple times during inference, utilizing the resulting output distribution to estimate predictive uncertainty.
Although images are easily combined by stacking in the MIMO method, adapting MIMO to 3D LiDAR object detection is not as straightforward. It requires combining multiple input point clouds, which can be costly and potentially negate the performance advantage of MIMO. Therefore, we propose to extend the original idea such that the multi-input happens at the feature level. It eliminates having the voxelization bottleneck and transfer such a bottleneck to the middle layers of the network. We perform multi-input over the bird's-eyeview (BEV) feature maps. This is different from the original MIMO which stacks raw inputs, but is key for the LiDARbased 3D object detection. We associate the success of this extension with the fact that the voxel feature network does

not have enough capacity to have a significant contribution to uncertainty estimation.
We evaluate the resulting LiDAR-MIMO design using two different 3D object detectors and compare them with MC dropout and ensembles. We demonstrate that LiDAR-MIMO has comparable performance with MC dropout and ensemble in terms of uncertainty estimation quality, as measured by scoring rules and calibration errors. However, it achieves this while being twice as fast as MC dropout and ensemble, and having a higher detection performance (mAP) than both the vanilla DNN (baseline) and MC dropout, as shown in Fig. 1. The baseline model is trained without any extensions for uncertainty estimation.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows: (i) We are the first to adapt the MIMO architecture to LiDARbased 3D object detection, confirming the effectiveness of this method in this new task. (ii) We modify the MIMO architecture to combine inputs at feature level rather than raw inputs to reduce data processing, which is key for LiDAR point clouds in real-time constrained environments. Further, this modification also takes better advantage of the limited available capacity in the underlying object detector compared to the original approach. (iii) We extensively evaluate LiDAR-MIMO over multiple 3D object detectors and show LiDAR-MIMO has higher mAP than MC dropout, comparable performance on uncertainty assessments, and is only marginally slower than the underlying vanilla detector. As a result, LiDAR-MIMO can be can be twice as fast as using MC dropout or ensembles.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS
A. 3D object detection for LiDAR point clouds
LiDAR-based 3D object detection has emerged as a pivotal component of autonomous driving systems, with pointbased [8], [9], voxel-based [10], [11], [12], [13], and hybrid approaches showing steadily improvement [14]. Voxel-based approaches that exploit the bird's-eye view (BEV) projection, such as PointPillars (PP) [13] and SECOND (SC) [11], achieve competitive detection performance at low computational cost, which makes them attractive for deployment on AVs. Information for BEV feature map creation is listed within the papers. Although hybrid approaches, like PVRCNN [14], have higher mean average precision (mAP), they also add substantial computational cost. For example, PVRCNN [14] achieves 82.97% mAP on the KITTI benchmark, compared to 80.29% mAP for SC, but SC runs 2x faster than PV-RCNN [15].
Fig. 2 highlights the main components of a voxel-based detector using PP and SC as examples (ignore the elements in red for now). The input point cloud is first voxelized into pillar (PP) or cuboid (SC) voxels. These are fed into a voxel feature extraction (VFE) network, which is PointNet [16] for PP and sparse 3D convolutions for SC. The BEV projection of the resulting features, or BEV feature maps, are then passed to a backbone, which applies 2D convolutions. Finally, the backbone features are passed to a detection head, which outputs classes and bounding boxes of the detected

objects. The BEV feature maps are sometimes referred to as a "2D pseudo image" [16].
B. Uncertainty estimation for classification
The predictive uncertainty of a classification network has two components [17]: epistemic uncertainty, which is due to the uncertainty over the model parameters caused by the limited availability of data; and aleatoric uncertainty, which is due to the inherent noise in the data itself. The predictive distribution output by a network should adequately reflect both sources of uncertainty, which is the case for Bayesian inference for NNs. However, since exact such inference is computationally intractable, practical realizations of BNNs that place a distribution on their weights are necessarily approximations, relying on making prior assumptions about the class of distributions for the weights and using different approximate inference methods, including variational Bayes [18] and Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods [2]. These methods are highly sensitive to hyper-parameters and difficult to scale to large datasets and network architectures [19].
A more practical class of approximate BNNs, which we discuss in the remainder of this section, rely on some form of model ensembling that samples models from the approximate posterior and combines their outputs to compute the resulting predictive distribution. For classification, the predictive distribution is simply the mean of the categorical distributions from each ensemble member [20]. For regression, each member is usually designed as a variance network [21], which is trained with two outputs, the mean and variance, using the so-called aleatoric regression loss [17]. The overall predictive distribution is then characterized by the mean and variance of the resulting mixture distribution [3]. We now briefly introduce ensembles and MC dropout, which are the two main practical methods for approximating BNNs found in literature, and MIMO, which aims at reducing the computational cost of these methods. Deep ensembles [3]: A state of the art baseline in uncertainty estimation is to train multiple models with the same architecture and ensure their diversity by random initialization of weights and training data shuffling. Ensembling is shown to outperform MC dropout on uncertainty prediction metrics [3]. In particular, it shows much stronger diversity of outputs than MC dropout, since each model is trained independently [7]. Although easily parallelized, deep ensembles remain very costly in terms of both processing and memory use. MC dropout [4]: MC dropout employs dropout both during training and inference and obtains multiple predictions by performing multiple forward passes with different dropout network realizations for the same input. Normally dropout layers are added throughout the network as a regularization method to reduce over-fitting [22]. Interestingly, MC dropout has been shown to be equivalent to approximate Bayesian inference in deep Gaussian processes [4]. MIMO [7]: Similar to MC dropout, a multi-input multioutput (MIMO) network represents an ensemble as a single

