Heterogeneous Graph Attention Network

arXiv:1903.07293v2 [cs.SI] 20 Jan 2021

Xiao Wang, Houye Ji
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications Beijing, China
{xiaowang,jhy1993}@bupt.edu.cn
Peng Cui, P. Yu
Tsinghua University Beijing, China
{cuip,psyu}@tsinghua.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Graph neural network, as a powerful graph representation technique based on deep learning, has shown superior performance and attracted considerable research interest. However, it has not been fully considered in graph neural network for heterogeneous graph which contains different types of nodes and links. The heterogeneity and rich semantic information bring great challenges for designing a graph neural network for heterogeneous graph. Recently, one of the most exciting advancements in deep learning is the attention mechanism, whose great potential has been well demonstrated in various areas. In this paper, we first propose a novel heterogeneous graph neural network based on the hierarchical attention, including node-level and semantic-level attentions. Specifically, the node-level attention aims to learn the importance between a node and its metapath based neighbors, while the semantic-level attention is able to learn the importance of different meta-paths. With the learned importance from both node-level and semantic-level attention, the importance of node and meta-path can be fully considered. Then the proposed model can generate node embedding by aggregating features from meta-path based neighbors in a hierarchical manner. Extensive experimental results on three real-world heterogeneous graphs not only show the superior performance of our proposed model over the state-of-the-arts, but also demonstrate its potentially good interpretability for graph analysis.
KEYWORDS
Social Network, Neural Network, Graph Analysis
ACM Reference Format: Xiao Wang, Houye Ji, Chuan Shi*, Bai Wang, Peng Cui, P. Yu, and Yanfang Ye. 2019. Heterogeneous Graph Attention Network. In Proceedings of WWW 2019, Jennifer B. Sartor, Theo D'Hondt, and Wolfgang De Meuter (Eds.). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 4, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.475/123_4
1 INTRODUCTION
The real-world data usually come together with the graph structure, such as social networks, citation networks, and the world wide
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). WWW 2019, May 2019, San Francisco, USA © 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). ACM ISBN 123-4567-24-567/08/06. https://doi.org/10.475/123_4

Chuan Shi*, Bai Wang
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications Beijing, China
{shichuan,wangbai}@bupt.edu.cn
Yanfang Ye
West Virginia University WV, USA
yanfang.ye@mail.wvu.edu
web. Graph neural network (GNN), as a powerful deep representation learning method for such graph data, has shown superior performance on network analysis and aroused considerable research interest. For example, [10, 20, 24] leverage deep neural network to learn node representations based on node features and the graph structure. Some works [6, 14, 18] propose the graph convolutional networks by generalizing the convolutional operation to graph. A recent research trend in deep learning is the attention mechanism, which deals with variable sized data and encourages the model to focus on the most salient parts of data. It has demonstrated the effectiveness in deep neural network framework and is widely applied to various applications, such as text analysis [1], knowledge graph [25] and image processing [38]. Graph Attention Network (GAT) [35], a novel convolution-style graph neural network, leverages attention mechanism for the homogeneous graph which includes only one type of nodes or links.
Despite the success of attention mechanism in deep learning, it has not been considered in the graph neural network framework for heterogeneous graph. As a matter of fact, the real-world graph usually comes with multi-types of nodes and edges, also widely known as heterogeneous information network (HIN) [28]. For convenience, we uniformly call it heterogeneous graph in this paper. Because the heterogeneous graph contains more comprehensive information and rich semantics, it has been widely used in many data mining tasks. Meta-path [32], a composite relation connecting two objects, is a widely used structure to capture the semantics. Taking the movie data IMDB1 shown in Figure 1(a) as an example, it contains three types of nodes include movie, actor and director. A relation between two movies can be revealed by meta-path Movie-Actor-Movie (MAM) which describes the co-actor relation, while Movie-Director-Movie (MDM) means that they are directed by the same director. As can be seen, depending on the meta-paths, the relation between nodes in the heterogeneous graph can have different semantics. Due to the complexity of heterogeneous graph, traditional graph neural network cannot be directly applied to heterogeneous graph.
Based on the above analysis, when designing graph neural network architecture with attention mechanism for heterogeneous graph, we need to address the following new requirements.
Heterogeneity of graph. The heterogeneity is an intrinsic property of heterogeneous graph, i.e., various types of nodes and edges. For example, different types of nodes have different traits and their features may fall in different feature space. Still taking IMDB as
1 https://www.imdb.com

WWW 2019, May 2019, San Francisco, USA

Xiao Wang, Houye Ji, Chuan Shi, Bai Wang et al.

Figure 1: An illustrative example of a heterogenous graph (IMDB). (a) Three types of nodes (i.e., actor, movie, director). (b) A heterogenous graph IMDB consists three types of nodes and two types of connections. (c) Two meta-paths involved in IMDB (i.e., Moive-Actor-Moive and Movie-Director-Movie). (d) Moive 1 and its meta-path based neighbors (i.e., 1, 2 and 3).
an example, the feature of an actor may involve in sex, age and nationality. On the other hand, the feature of movie may involve in plot and actors. How to handle such complex structural information and preserve the diverse feature information simultaneously is an urgent problem that needs to be solved.
Semantic-level attention. Different meaningful and complex semantic information are involved in heterogeneous graph, which are usually reflected by meta-paths [32]. Different meta-paths in heterogeneous graph may extract diverse semantic information. How to select the most meaningful meta-paths and fuse the semantic information for the specific task is an open problem [4, 19, 26]. Semantic-level attention aims to learn the importance of each metapath and assign proper weights to them. Still taking IMDB as an example, The Terminator can either connect to The Terminator 2 via Movie-Actor-Movie (both starred by Schwarzenegger) or connect to Birdy via Movie-Year-Movie (both shot in 1984). However, when identifying the genre of the movie The Terminator, MAM usually plays more important role, rather than MYM. Therefore, treating different meta-paths equally is unpractical and will weaken the semantic information provided by some useful meta-paths.
Node-level attention. In a heterogeneous graph, nodes can be connected via various types of relation, e.g., meta-path. Given a meta-path, each node has lots of meta-path based neighbors. How to distinguish the subtle difference of there neighbors and select some informative neighors is required. For each node, node-level attention aims to learn the importance of meta-path based neighbors and assign different attention values to them. Still taking IMDB as an example, when using the meta-path Movie-Director-Moive (the movies are with the same director), The Terminator will connect to Titanic and The Terminator 2 via director James Cameron. To better identify the genre of The Terminator as sci-fi movie, the model should pay more attention to The Terminator 2, rather than Titanic. Therefore, how to design a model which can discover the subtle differences of neighbors and learn their weights properly will be desired.
In this paper, we propose a novel Heterogeneous graph Attention Network, named HAN, which considers both of node-level and

semantic-level attentions. In particular, given the node features as input, we use the type-specific transformation matrix to project different types of node features into the same space. Then the node-level attention is able to learn the attention values between the nodes and their meta-path based neighbors, while the semantic-level attention aims to learn the attention values of different meta-paths for the specific task in the heterogeneous graph. Based on the learned attention values in terms of the two levels, our model can get the optimal combination of neighbors and multiple meta-paths in a hierarchical manner, which enables the learned node embeddings to better capture the complex structure and rich semantic information in a heterogeneous graph. After that, the overall model can be optimized via backpropagation in an end-to-end manner.
The contributions of our work are summarized as follows: · To our best knowledge, this is the first attempt to study the heterogeneous graph neural network based on attention mechanism. Our work enables the graph neural network to be directly applied to the heterogeneous graph, and further facilitates the heterogeneous graph based applications. · We propose a novel heterogeneous graph attention network (HAN) which includes both of the node-level and semantic-level attentions. Benefitting from such hierarchical attentions, the proposed HAN can take the importance of nodes and meta-paths into consideration simultaneously. Moreover, our model is high efficiency, with the linear complexity with respect to the number of meta-path based node pairs, which can be applied to large-scale heterogeneous graph. · We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the performance of the proposed model. The results show the superiority of the proposed model by comparing with the state-of-the-art models. More importantly, by analysing the hierarchical attention mechanism, the proposed HAN demonstrates its potentially good interpretability for heterogeneous graph analysis.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 Graph Neural Network
Graph neural networks (GNNs) which aim to extend the deep neural network to deal with arbitrary graph-structured data are introduced in [10, 24]. Yujia Li et al. [20] proposes a propagation model which can incorporate gated recurrent units to propagate information across all nodes. Recently, there is a surge of generalizing convolutional operation on the graph-structured data. The graph convolutional neural work generally falls into two categories, namely spectral domain and non-spectral domain. On one hand, spectral approaches work with a spectral representation of the graphs. Joan Bruna et al. [2] extends convolution to general graphs by finding the corresponding Fourier basis. Michaël et al. [6] utilizes K-order Chebyshev polynomials to approximate smooth filters in the spectral domain. Kipf et al. [18] proposes a spectral approach, named Graph Convolutional Network, which designs a graph convolutional network via a localized first-order approximation of spectral graph convolutions. On the other hand, we also have non-spectral approaches, which define convolutions directly on the graph, operating on groups of spatially close neighbors. Hamilton et al. [14] introduces GraphSAGE which performs a neural network based aggregator over a fixed size node neighbor. It can learn a function that generates embeddings by aggregating features from a node's local neighborhood.

