Plane and Sample: Maximizing Information about Autonomous Vehicle Performance using Submodular Optimization
Anne Collin1, Amitai Y. Bin-Nun1, Radboud Duintjer Tebbens1

arXiv:2106.08389v1 [cs.RO] 15 Jun 2021

Abstract-- As autonomous vehicles (AVs) take on growing Operational Design Domains (ODDs), they need to go through a systematic, transparent, and scalable evaluation process to demonstrate their benefits to society. Current scenario sampling techniques for AV performance evaluation usually focus on a specific functionality, such as lane changing, and do not accommodate a transfer of information about an AV system from one ODD to the next. In this paper, we reformulate the scenario sampling problem across ODDs and functionalities as a submodular optimization problem. To do so, we abstract AV performance as a Bayesian Hierarchical Model, which we use to infer information gained by revealing performance in new scenarios. We propose the information gain as a measure of scenario relevance and evaluation progress. Furthermore, we leverage the submodularity, or diminishing returns, property of the information gain not only to find a near-optimal scenario set, but also to propose a stopping criterion for an AV performance evaluation campaign. We find that we only need to explore about 7.5% of the scenario space to meet this criterion, a 23% improvement over Latin Hypercube Sampling.
I. INTRODUCTION
As the autonomous vehicle (AV) industry is shifting its focus from prototyping vehicles to delivering safe products to society [1], the need for a systematic performance evaluation procedure is growing dramatically. Furthermore, AV's Operational Design Domains (ODDs), defined as an intersection of many factors such as road infrastructure and weather [2], are bound to grow, calling for scalable evaluation methods. In addition to statistical methods examining rates of specific events per millions of miles driven, scenariobased evaluation is an important method to test the AV in specific driving situations [1], [3], [4]. Although the number of driving scenarios may be theoretically infinite, the space of possible scenarios can be discretized into a finite number. Nevertheless, reasonable discretization schemes are likely to create scenario spaces large enough that strategic search options are necessary to efficiently evaluate the performance of the AV.
Systematic sampling methods for the validation of the entire AV system either try to form a set of scenarios representative of real world event rates [5]­[7], or search for scenarios in which weaknesses or abrupt performance changes in the AV are apparent [8]­[10]. These methods typically center on a specific AV functionality, such as lane changing or vehicle following. The former method is challenging because of the difficulty in assessing the frequency of specific events in the AV's ODD. The latter method converges to scenarios in which systems violate a
1 Motional. Boston, MA.

pre-defined criterion, but does not allow the estimation of the violation rate of that criterion. In both methods, even a small change of ODD would require a re-estimation of frequencies or analysis of new functionalities.
In this paper, we propose a hierarchical statistical representation of AV performance, as well as a method to determine a scenario set to evaluate this performance across ODDs. The hierarchical structure supports the reuse of information from one ODD to the next, and mitigates the sensitivity of the performance estimation to event frequencies, as the method does not use them directly. We offer a criterion for assessing the value of testing on a specific scenario, and our sampling method provides guarantees of near-optimality with respect to this criterion. This is, to the authors' knowledge, the first study that offers such a guarantee with a scenario selection method.
The method comprises the following steps (summarized in Fig. 1): first, we model AV performance as a Bayesian Hierarchical Model. The emergence of formal rules of expected AV behavior, and attached violation metrics, facilitates the quantitative assessment of AV performance in any scenario [11]­[13]. We use the factors that compose an ODD, such as town of operation, as levels in the hierarchy. This representation leverages ODD factors as units of analysis, each with just a few observations. Indeed, it becomes difficult to observe scenarios corresponding to an ODD where all the factors are fixed, for example blue hospital signs with a specific road curvature with a high rain density and low communication reliability. The number of qualifying observations decreases with the amount of fixed factors. We call this part of the method plane, because each level of the hierarchy effectively constitutes a hyperplane of the previous level.
Second, we perform inference on AV performance through this Bayesian Hierarchical Model. This allows the computation of information gain on the system provided by each new scenario, which is the metric we propose to evaluate the relevance of a new scenario and of a scenario set. The Bayesian Hierarchical Model provides conditional independence properties between AV performance in different scenario space hyperplanes, causing the information gain to be submodular. This means that the information gain has a diminishing returns property; as we add more scenarios, the increase in information becomes marginal. Thus, we leverage the greedy algorithm for submodular optimization to provide a scenario set with a guarantee of a near maximal level of information gain (sample). Our stopping criterion is when the information gain does not grow anymore given a statistical

©2021 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

AV performance observation in ODD
planes

Bayesian Hierarchical Model fit

Plane

Potential new scenarios

Information gain from any scenario

Submodular optimization Sample

Input Process Output

Near-optimal scenario set and stopping criterion
Fig. 1: Overview of the methodology presented in this paper. The Bayesian Hierarchical Model is used to compute the information gain, which is the objective function of the optimization problem used for sampling.
confidence level. We illustrate the method with performance obtained by simulating an AV on routes from the CARLA challenge [14]. We find that we obtain a plateauing information gain with a 90% confidence after only testing about 7.5% of the scenario space, which is 23 % less than what Latin Hypercube Sampling needs to explore to obtain the same quantity of information.
To summarize, this work makes the following contributions:
· A novel statistical representation of AV performance: a Bayesian Hierarchical Model, relying on quantitative evaluations of behavioral rules.
· A metric to quantify the relevance of a new scenario or set of scenarios: information gain.
· A scenario selection algorithm with near-optimality guarantees: the greedy algorithm for submodular optimization.
· A stopping criterion to contain the size of the scenario set: when the information gain is plateauing, with a given statistical confidence.
Section II reviews related work in the scenario sampling literature. Section III details the steps used in the method described above, and section IV shows the results of the method in the CARLA experiment using simulated log data.
II. RELATED WORK
The problem of scenario sampling for AV testing and validation has attracted a lot of interest in recent years. We refer the reader to [15] for a more complete review of the field.

A. AV Performance Representation
Defining the ideal behavior for an AV is a difficult task because of the legal, ethical, safety objectives the system has to balance [11]. The AV community has yet to agree upon a set of metrics to evaluate AV performance in a given scenario, however several metrics have been used. Active learning techniques indirectly exploit metrics for AV behavior as features that they learn preferences from [16]. Refs. [13], [17] propose sets of rules using temporal logic that AVs should strive to follow, such as minimizing collisions, staying within lane, and driving below the speed limit. Ref. [12] associates quantitative violation metrics with these logical statements. These works provide quantiative metrics for evaluating AV behavior across activities and ODDs. We want to evaluate an AV's metric violation rate across scenarios efficiently to either prompt a redesign if the aggregated violation is too high, or to validate the AV if it is at a later stage of development.
B. Metrics for Value of a Scenario Set and Stopping Criteria
To structure the scenario space, we take advantage of the geometric representation that uses features, or building blocks, as coordinates of a scenario vector [18], [19]. This modular view captures the combinatorial size of the scenario space. Using a finer feature representation increases the probability of having interesting scenarios, however it also increases the number of scenarios to be sampled. Similarity metrics and clustering techniques can be used to downsample the scenario space [18], however the number of scenarios still grows rapidly with the number of scenario features. Statistical hypothesis testing has been used to tackle the notion of completeness, or lack of redundancy, of a scenario set to provide a stopping criterion, but the ability to compute these metrics relies on major assumptions on the frequency of such scenarios in the real settings [5], [6].
C. Scenario Sampling
Some well-established sampling techniques aim at covering the space of possible scenarios to estimate AV performance. Many disciplines leverage Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS) and Orthogonal Arrays to test the reliability of systems [20], [21]. However, these techniques usually require independence between the scenario features they sample from. Ref. [7] uses importance sampling to test AVs, but looks specifically for rare events. None of these techniques leverage the information obtained about the system in other ODDs to inform future sampling.
Other more recently developed techniques, such as adaptive stress-testing, reuse the information obtained in previous scenarios to choose the next ones, but they are usually focused on a specific functionality and aim at unveiling critical situations, rather than establishing an overall performance rate across ODDs [8]­[10], [22]. Machine learning techniques increase the efficiency of the sampling, especially for subsystem development [23], [24], however they lack transparency and guarantees, in addition to adding difficulty in parameter tuning [25].

