MixHop: Higher-Order Graph Convolutional Architectures via Sparsified Neighborhood Mixing

arXiv:1905.00067v3 [cs.LG] 19 Jun 2019

Sami Abu-El-Haija 1 Bryan Perozzi 2 Amol Kapoor 2 Nazanin Alipourfard 1 Kristina Lerman 1 Hrayr Harutyunyan 1 Greg Ver Steeg 1 Aram Galstyan 1

Abstract
Existing popular methods for semi-supervised learning with Graph Neural Networks (such as the Graph Convolutional Network) provably cannot learn a general class of neighborhood mixing relationships. To address this weakness, we propose a new model, MixHop, that can learn these relationships, including difference operators, by repeatedly mixing feature representations of neighbors at various distances. MixHop requires no additional memory or computational complexity, and outperforms on challenging baselines. In addition, we propose sparsity regularization that allows us to visualize how the network prioritizes neighborhood information across different graph datasets. Our analysis of the learned architectures reveals that neighborhood mixing varies per datasets.
1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) establish state-ofthe-art performance for many Computer Vision applications (Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Szegedy et al., 2015). CNNs consist of a series of convolutional layers, each parameterized by a filter with pre-specified spatial dimensions. CNNs are powerful because they are able to learn a hierarchy of translation invariant feature detectors.
The success of CNNs in Computer Vision and other domains has motivated researchers (Bruna et al., 2014; Defferrard et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017) to extend the convolutional operator from regular grids, in which the structure is fixed and repeated everywhere, to graph-structured data, where nodes' neighborhoods can greatly vary in structure across the graph. Generalizing convolution to graph struc-
1Information Sciences Institute, University of Southern California 2Google AI, New York. Correspondence to: Sami <sami@haija.org>, Bryan <bperozzi@acm.org>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright 2019 by the author(s).

A^H (i)

W (i)

H (i+1)

H (i+1)

H(i+1) = (A^H(i)W (i))

( | | ) H(i+1) =  A^0H(i)W (i) A^1H(i)W (i) . . .

0

1

(a) Traditional graph convolution. (b) Our mixed feature model.

Figure 1: Feature propagation in traditional graph convolu-
tion methods (a), compared to ours (b). We show the latent
feature for red node in layer i + 1 given node features in
layer i. The traditional graph convolution case only aggregates from immediate neighbors A^H(i). In our MixHop the feature vector H(i+1) is a learned combination of the node's neighbors A^jH(i) at multiple distances j.

tures should allow models to learn location-invariant node and neighborhood features.
Early extensions of the graph convolution (GC) operator were theoretically motivated (Bruna et al., 2014), but (1) required quadratic computational complexity in number of nodes and therefore were not scalable to large graphs, and (2) required the graph to be completely observed during training, targeting only the transductive setting. Defferrard et al. (2016) and Kipf & Welling (2017) propose GC approximations that are computationally-efficient (linear complexity, in the number of edges), and can be applied in inductive settings, where the test graphs are not observed during training.
However, said approximations limit the representational capacity of the model. In particular, if we represent an image as a graph of pixel nodes, where edges connect adjacent pixels, GC approximations applied on the pixel graphs will be unable to learn Gabor-like1 filters. Gabor filters are fundamental to the human visual cognitive system (Daugman, 1980; 1985). Further, these filters are automatically recovered by training CNNs on natural images (see Krizhevsky et al. (2012); Lee et al. (2009) for visualizations). Their
1We use "like", as graph edges are not axis-aligned.

MixHop: Higher-Order Graph Convolution Architectures via Sparsified Neighborhood Mixing

automatic recovery implies their usefulness for hierarchical object representations and scene understanding, as guided by the optimization (e.g. classification) objective. Since Graphs are generic data structures that can encode data from various domains (e.g. images, chemical compounds, social, and biological networks), realizing Gabor-like filters in Graph domains ought to yield a general advantage.
In this work, we address the limitations of the approximations that prevent these models from capturing the graph analogue of Gabor filters. Our proposed method, MixHop, allows full linear mixing of neighborhood information (as illustrated in Figure 1), at every message passing step. Specifically, our contributions are the following:
· We formalize Delta Operators and their generalization, Neighborhood Mixing, to analyze the expressiveness of graph convolution models. We show that popular graph convolution models (e.g. GCN of Kipf & Welling (2017)) cannot learn these representations.
· We propose MixHop, a new Graph Convolutional layer that mixes powers of the adjacency matrix. We prove that MixHop can learn a wider class of representations without increasing the memory footprint or computational complexity of previous GCN models.
· We provide a method of learning to divide modeling capacity among various widths and depths of a MixHop model, yielding powerful compact GCN architectures. These architectures conveniently also allow visual inspection of which aspects of a graph are important.
We demonstrate our method on node classification tasks. Our code is available on github.com/samihaija/mixhop.
2. Preliminaries and Related Work
2.1. Notation Graph G with n nodes and m edges has a feature matrix X  Rn×s0 with s0 features per node, and training labels YI , annotating a partial set of nodes with the c possible classes. The output of the task, YO, is an assignment of labels to the nodes, Y  [0, 1]n×c. Let A denote the adjacency matrix of G, where a non-zero entry Aij indicates an edge between nodes i and j. We consider the case of a binary adjacency matrix (A  {0, 1}n×n), but this notation can be extended w.l.o.g. to weighted graphs. Let In be the n × n identity matrix, and D be the degree matrix, D = diag(d), where d  Zn is the degree vector with dj = i Aij.
2.2. Message Passing Message Passing algorithms can be used to learn models over graphs (Gilmer et al., 2017). In such models, each graph node (and optionally edge) holds a latent vector, initialized to the node's input features Each node repeatedly passes its current latent vector to, and aggregates incoming messages from, its immediate neighbors. After l steps of

message passing and feature aggregation, every node outputs a representation which can be used for an upstream task e.g. node classification, or entire graph classification. The l steps (message passing and aggregation) can be parametrized and trained via Backprop-Through-Structure algorithms (Goller & Kuchler, 1996), to minimize an objective measured using the node representations as output by the l'th step.

2.3. Graph Convolutional Networks

We refer to the Graph Convolutional Network proposed by Kipf & Welling (2017) as the vanilla GCN. The vanilla GCN Graph Convolutional (GC) Layer is defined as:

H(i+1) = (AH(i)W (i)),

(1)

where H(i)  Rn×si and H(i+1)  Rn×si+1 are the input and output activations for layer i, W (i)  Rsi×si+1 is a

trainable weight matrix and  is an element-wise activation

function, and A is a symmetrically normalized adjacency

matrix

with

self-connections,

A

=

D

-

1 2

(A

+

In)D-

1 2

.

A

GCN model with l layers is then defined as:

H(i) =

X (AH(i-1)W (i-1))

if i = 0 if i  [1 .. l],

(2)

and the output YO can be set as to function of H(l). The vanilla GCN can be described as a message passing algorithm, where a node's latent representation at step i is defined as an average of its neighbors' representations from step i - 1, multiplied by W (i-1). See Gilmer et al. (2017).

The vanilla GCN makes three simplifying assumptions: (1) it is a Chebyshev rank-2 approximation of multiplication in the Graph Fourier basis, defined to be the eigenbasis of the graph Laplacian; (2) it assumes that the two coefficients of the Chebyshev polynomials multiply to -1; (3) a renormalization trick adds self-connections (identity matrix) to A before, rather than after, normalization. These simplifications reduce the computational complexity and prevent exploding/vanishing gradients. However, it simplifies the definition of convolution to become a simple neighborhoodaveraging operator: this is obvious from Equation 1 ­ the features are left-multiplied by normalized adjacency A, effectively replacing each row in the feature matrix, by the average of its neighbors (and itself, due to renormalization).

2.4. Semi-supervised Node Classification
We are interested in semi-supervised node classification tasks. To train a GCN model on such a task, we select row slices from the output matrix YO, corresponding to nodes with known labels in YI , on which a loss and its gradients are evaluated. The gradient of the loss is backpropagated through the GC layers where they get multiplied by A , spreading gradients to unlabeled examples.

