Graph U-Nets

arXiv:1905.05178v1 [cs.LG] 11 May 2019

Hongyang Gao 1 Shuiwang Ji 1

Abstract
We consider the problem of representation learning for graph data. Convolutional neural networks can naturally operate on images, but have significant challenges in dealing with graph data. Given images are special cases of graphs with nodes lie on 2D lattices, graph embedding tasks have a natural correspondence with image pixelwise prediction tasks such as segmentation. While encoder-decoder architectures like U-Nets have been successfully applied on many image pixelwise prediction tasks, similar methods are lacking for graph data. This is due to the fact that pooling and up-sampling operations are not natural on graph data. To address these challenges, we propose novel graph pooling (gPool) and unpooling (gUnpool) operations in this work. The gPool layer adaptively selects some nodes to form a smaller graph based on their scalar projection values on a trainable projection vector. We further propose the gUnpool layer as the inverse operation of the gPool layer. The gUnpool layer restores the graph into its original structure using the position information of nodes selected in the corresponding gPool layer. Based on our proposed gPool and gUnpool layers, we develop an encoder-decoder model on graph, known as the graph U-Nets. Our experimental results on node classification and graph classification tasks demonstrate that our methods achieve consistently better performance than previous models.
1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) (LeCun et al., 2012) have demonstrated great capability in various challenging artificial intelligence tasks, especially in fields of computer
1Department of Computer Science & Engineering, Texas A&M University, TX, USA. Correspondence to: Hongyang Gao <hongyang.gao@tamu.edu>, Shuiwang Ji <sji@tamu.edu>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright 2019 by the author(s).

vision (He et al., 2017; Huang et al., 2017) and natural language processing (Bahdanau et al., 2015). One common property behind these tasks is that both images and texts have grid-like structures. Elements on feature maps have locality and order information, which enables the application of convolutional operations (Defferrard et al., 2016).
In practice, many real-world data can be naturally represented as graphs such as social and biological networks. Due to the great success of CNNs on grid-like data, applying them on graph data (Gori et al., 2005; Scarselli et al., 2009) is particularly appealing. Recently, there have been many attempts to extend convolutions to graph data (GNNs) (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Velickovic´ et al., 2017; Gao et al., 2018). One common use of convolutions on graphs is to compute node representations (Hamilton et al., 2017; Ying et al., 2018). With learned node representations, we can perform various tasks on graphs such as node classification and link prediction.
Images can be considered as special cases of graphs, in which nodes lie on regular 2D lattices. It is this special structure that enables the use of convolution and pooling operations on images. Based on this relationship, node classification and embedding tasks have a natural correspondence with pixel-wise prediction tasks such as image segmentation (Noh et al., 2015; Gao & Ji, 2017; Je´gou et al., 2017). In particular, both tasks aim to make predictions for each input unit, corresponding to a pixel on images or a node in graphs. In the computer vision field, pixel-wise prediction tasks have achieved major advances recently. Encoder-decoder architectures like the U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) are state-of-the-art methods for these tasks. It is thus highly interesting to develop U-Net-like architectures for graph data. In addition to convolutions, pooling and up-sampling operations are essential building blocks in these architectures. However, extending these operations to graph data is highly challenging. Unlike grid-like data such as images and texts, nodes in graphs have no spatial locality and order information as required by regular pooling operations.
To bridge the above gap, we propose novel graph pooling (gPool) and unpooling (gUnpool) operations in this work. Based on these two operations, we propose U-Netlike architectures for graph data. The gPool operation samples some nodes to form a smaller graph based on their

Graph U-Nets

scalar projection values on a trainable projection vector. As an inverse operation of gPool, we propose a corresponding graph unpooling (gUnpool) operation, which restores the graph to its original structure with the help of locations of nodes selected in the corresponding gPool layer. Based on the gPool and gUnpool layers, we develop graph U-Nets, which allow high-level feature encoding and decoding for network embedding. Experimental results on node classification and graph classification tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed methods as compared to previous methods.

2. Related Work
Recently, there has been a rich line of research on graph neural networks (Gilmer et al., 2017). Inspired by the first order graph Laplacian methods, (Kipf & Welling, 2017) proposed graph convolutional networks (GCNs), which achieved promising performance on graph node classification tasks. The layer-wise forward-propagation operation of GCNs is defined as:

X

+1

=

(D^ -

1 2

A^D^ -

1 2

X

W

),

(1)

where A^ = A + I is used to add self-loops in the input adjacency matrix A, X is the feature matrix of layer . The GCN layer uses the diagonal node degree matrix D^ to normalize A^. W is a trainable weight matrix that applies a linear transformation to feature vectors. GCNs essentially perform aggregation and transformation on node features without learning trainable filters. (Hamilton et al., 2017) tried to sample a fixed number of neighboring nodes to keep the computational footprint consistent. (Velickovic´ et al., 2017) proposed to use attention mechanisms to enable different weights for neighboring nodes. (Schlichtkrull et al., 2018) used relational graph convolutional networks for link prediction and entity classification. Some studies applied GNNs to graph classification tasks (Duvenaud et al., 2015; Dai et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2018). (Bronstein et al., 2017) discussed possible ways of applying deep learning on graph data. (Henaff et al., 2015) and (Bruna et al., 2014) proposed to use spectral networks for large-scale graph classification tasks. Some studies also applied graph kernels on traditional computer vision tasks (Gama et al., 2019; Fey et al., 2018; Monti et al., 2017).
In addition to convolution, some studies tried to extend pooling operations to graphs. (Defferrard et al., 2016) proposed to use binary tree indexing for graph coarsening, which fixes indices of nodes before applying 1-D pooling operations. (Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2017) used deterministic graph clustering algorithm to determine pooling patterns. (Ying et al., 2018) used an assignment matrix to achieve pooling by assigning nodes to different clusters of the next layer.

3. Graph U-Nets
In this section, we introduce the graph pooling (gPool) layer and graph unpooling (gUnpool) layer. Based on these two new layers, we develop the graph U-Nets for node classification tasks.
3.1. Graph Pooling Layer
Pooling layers play important roles in CNNs on grid-like data. They can reduce sizes of feature maps and enlarge receptive fields, thereby giving rise to better generalization and performance (Yu & Koltun, 2016). On grid-like data such as images, feature maps are partitioned into nonoverlapping rectangles, on which non-linear down-sampling functions like maximum are applied. In addition to local pooling, global pooling layers (Zhao et al., 2015a) perform down-sampling operations on all input units, thereby reducing each feature map to a single number. In contrast, k-max pooling layers (Kalchbrenner et al., 2014) select the k-largest units out of each feature map.
However, we cannot directly apply these pooling operations to graphs. In particular, there is no locality information among nodes in graphs. Thus the partition operation is not applicable on graphs. The global pooling operation will reduce all nodes to one single node, which restricts the flexibility of networks. The k-max pooling operation outputs the k-largest units that may come from different nodes in graphs, resulting in inconsistency in the connectivity of selected nodes.
In this section, we propose the graph pooling (gPool) layer to enable down-sampling on graph data. In this layer, we adaptively select a subset of nodes to form a new but smaller graph. To this end, we employ a trainable projection vector p. By projecting all node features to 1D, we can perform k-max pooling for node selection. Since the selection is based on 1D footprint of each node, the connectivity in the new graph is consistent across nodes. Given a node i with its feature vector xi, the scalar projection of xi on p is yi = xip/ p . Here, yi measures how much information of node i can be retained when projected onto the direction of p. By sampling nodes, we wish to preserve as much information as possible from the original graph. To achieve this, we select nodes with the largest scalar projection values on p to form a new graph.
Suppose there are N nodes in a graph G and each of which contains C features. The graph can be represented by two matrices; those are the adjacency matrix A  RN×N and the feature matrix X  RN×C . Each non-zero entry in the adjacency matrix A represents an edge between two nodes in the graph. Each row vector xi in the feature matrix X denotes the feature vector of node i in the graph. The layer-wise propagation rule of the graph pooling layer is

