Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020

arXiv:2003.03123v2 [cs.LG] 5 Apr 2022

DIRECTIONAL MESSAGE PASSING FOR MOLECULAR GRAPHS
Johannes Gasteiger, Janek Groß & Stephan Günnemann Technical University of Munich, Germany {j.gasteiger,grossja,guennemann}@in.tum.de

ABSTRACT
Graph neural networks have recently achieved great successes in predicting quantum mechanical properties of molecules. These models represent a molecule as a graph using only the distance between atoms (nodes). They do not, however, consider the spatial direction from one atom to another, despite directional information playing a central role in empirical potentials for molecules, e.g. in angular potentials. To alleviate this limitation we propose directional message passing, in which we embed the messages passed between atoms instead of the atoms themselves. Each message is associated with a direction in coordinate space. These directional message embeddings are rotationally equivariant since the associated directions rotate with the molecule. We propose a message passing scheme analogous to belief propagation, which uses the directional information by transforming messages based on the angle between them. Additionally, we use spherical Bessel functions and spherical harmonics to construct theoretically well-founded, orthogonal representations that achieve better performance than the currently prevalent Gaussian radial basis representations while using fewer than 1/4 of the parameters. We leverage these innovations to construct the directional message passing neural network (DimeNet). DimeNet outperforms previous GNNs on average by 76 % on MD17 and by 31 % on QM9. Our implementation is available online. 1

1 INTRODUCTION

In recent years scientists have started leveraging machine learning to reduce the computation time required for predicting molecular properties from a matter of hours and days to mere milliseconds. With the advent of graph neural networks (GNNs) this approach has recently experienced a small revolution, since they do not require any form of manual feature engineering and significantly outperform previous models (Gilmer et al., 2017; Schütt et al., 2017). GNNs model the complex interactions between atoms by embedding each atom in a high-dimensional space and updating these embeddings by passing messages between atoms. By predicting the potential energy these models effectively learn an empirical potential function. Classically, these functions have been modeled as the sum of four parts: (Leach, 2001)

E = Ebonds + Eangle + Etorsion + Enon-bonded,

(1)

where Ebonds models the dependency on bond lengths, Eangle on the angles between bonds, Etorsion on bond rotations, i.e. the dihedral angle between two planes defined by pairs of bonds, and Enon-bonded models interactions between unconnected atoms, e.g. via electrostatic or van der Waals interactions. The update messages in GNNs, however, only depend on the previous atom embeddings and the pairwise distances between atoms ­ not on directional information such as bond angles and rotations. Thus, GNNs lack the second and third terms of this equation and can only model them via complex higher-order interactions of messages. Extending GNNs to model them directly is not straightforward since GNNs solely rely on pairwise distances, which ensures their invariance to translation, rotation, and inversion of the molecule, which are important physical requirements.

In this paper, we propose to resolve this restriction by using embeddings associated with the directions to neighboring atoms, i.e. by embedding atoms as a set of messages. These directional message

1https://www.daml.in.tum.de/dimenet

1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
embeddings are equivariant with respect to the above transformations since the directions move with the molecule. Hence, they preserve the relative directional information between neighboring atoms. We propose to let message embeddings interact based on the distance between atoms and the angle between directions. Both distances and angles are invariant to translation, rotation, and inversion of the molecule, as required. Additionally, we show that the distance and angle can be jointly represented in a principled and effective manner by using spherical Bessel functions and spherical harmonics. We leverage these innovations to construct the directional message passing neural network (DimeNet). DimeNet can learn both molecular properties and atomic forces. It is twice continuously differentiable and solely based on the atom types and coordinates, which are essential properties for performing molecular dynamics simulations. DimeNet outperforms previous GNNs on average by 76 % on MD17 and by 31 % on QM9. Our paper's main contributions are:
1. Directional message passing, which allows GNNs to incorporate directional information by connecting recent advances in the fields of equivariance and graph neural networks as well as ideas from belief propagation and empirical potential functions such as Eq. 1.
2. Theoretically principled orthogonal basis representations based on spherical Bessel functions and spherical harmonics. Bessel functions achieve better performance than Gaussian radial basis functions while reducing the radial basis dimensionality by 4x or more.
3. The Directional Message Passing Neural Network (DimeNet): A novel GNN that leverages these innovations to set the new state of the art for molecular predictions and is suitable both for predicting molecular properties and for molecular dynamics simulations.
2 RELATED WORK
ML for molecules. The classical way of using machine learning for predicting molecular properties is combining an expressive, hand-crafted representation of the atomic neighborhood (Bartók et al., 2013) with Gaussian processes (Bartók et al., 2010; 2017; Chmiela et al., 2017) or neural networks (Behler & Parrinello, 2007). Recently, these methods have largely been superseded by graph neural networks, which do not require any hand-crafted features but learn representations solely based on the atom types and coordinates molecules (Duvenaud et al., 2015; Gilmer et al., 2017; Schütt et al., 2017; Hy et al., 2018; Unke & Meuwly, 2019). Our proposed message embeddings can also be interpreted as directed edge embeddings or embeddings on the line graph (Chen et al., 2019b). (Undirected) edge embeddings have already been used in previous GNNs for molecules (Jørgensen et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2019a). However, these GNNs use both node and edge embeddings and do not leverage any directional information.
Graph neural networks. GNNs were first proposed in the 90s (Baskin et al., 1997; Sperduti & Starita, 1997) and 00s (Gori et al., 2005; Scarselli et al., 2009). General GNNs have been largely inspired by their application to molecular graphs and have started to achieve breakthrough performance in various tasks at around the same time the molecular variants did (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Gasteiger et al., 2019; Zambaldi et al., 2019). Some recent progress has been focused on GNNs that are more powerful than the 1-Weisfeiler-Lehman test of isomorphism (Morris et al., 2019; Maron et al., 2019). However, for molecular predictions these models are significantly outperformed by GNNs focused on molecules (see Sec. 7). Some recent GNNs have incorporated directional information by considering the change in local coordinate systems per atom (Ingraham et al., 2019). However, this approach breaks permutation invariance and is therefore only applicable to chain-like molecules (e.g. proteins).
Equivariant neural networks. Group equivariance as a principle of modern machine learning was first proposed by Cohen & Welling (2016). Following work has generalized this principle to spheres (Cohen et al., 2018), molecules (Thomas et al., 2018), volumetric data (Weiler et al., 2018), and general manifolds (Cohen et al., 2019). Equivariance with respect to continuous rotations has been achieved so far by switching back and forth between Fourier and coordinate space in each layer (Cohen et al., 2018) or by using a fully Fourier space model (Kondor et al., 2018; Anderson et al., 2019). The former introduces major computational overhead and the latter imposes significant constraints on model construction, such as the inability of using non-linearities. Our proposed solution does not suffer from either of those limitations.
2

