arXiv:2002.07962v1 [cs.LG] 19 Feb 2020

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
INDUCTIVE REPRESENTATION LEARNING ON
TEMPORAL GRAPHS
Da Xu, Chuanwei Ruan, Evren Korpeoglu , Sushant Kumar , Kannan Achan Walmart Labs Sunnyvale, CA 94086, USA {Da.Xu,Chuanwei.Ruan,EKorpeoglu,SKumar4,KAchan}@walmartlabs.com
ABSTRACT
Inductive representation learning on temporal graphs is an important step toward salable machine learning on real-world dynamic networks. The evolving nature of temporal dynamic graphs requires handling new nodes as well as capturing temporal patterns. The node embeddings, which are now functions of time, should represent both the static node features and the evolving topological structures. Moreover, node and topological features can be temporal as well, whose patterns the node embeddings should also capture. We propose the temporal graph attention (TGAT) layer to efficiently aggregate temporal-topological neighborhood features as well as to learn the time-feature interactions. For TGAT, we use the self-attention mechanism as building block and develop a novel functional time encoding technique based on the classical Bochner's theorem from harmonic alaysis. By stacking TGAT layers, the network recognizes the node embeddings as functions of time and is able to inductively infer embeddings for both new and observed nodes as the graph evolves. The proposed approach handles both node classification and link prediction task, and can be naturally extended to include the temporal edge features. We evaluate our method with transductive and inductive tasks under temporal settings with two benchmark and one industrial dataset. Our TGAT model compares favorably to state-of-the-art baselines as well as the previous temporal graph embedding approaches.
1 INTRODUCTION
The technique of learning lower-dimensional vector embeddings on graphs have been widely applied to graph analysis tasks (Perozzi et al., 2014; Tang et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2016) and deployed in industrial systems (Ying et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2018a). Most of the graph representation learning approaches only accept static or non-temporal graphs as input, despite the fact that many graph-structured data are time-dependent. In social network, citation network, question answering forum and user-item interaction system, graphs are created as temporal interactions between nodes. Using the final state as a static portrait of the graph is reasonable in some cases, such as the proteinprotein interaction network, as long as node interactions are timeless in nature. Otherwise, ignoring the temporal information can severely diminish the modelling efforts and even causing questionable inference. For instance, models may mistakenly utilize future information for predicting past interactions during training and testing if the temporal constraints are disregarded. More importantly, the dynamic and evolving nature of many graph-related problems demand an explicitly modelling of the timeliness whenever nodes and edges are added, deleted or changed over time.
Learning representations on temporal graphs is extremely challenging, and it is not until recently that several solutions are proposed (Nguyen et al., 2018; Li et al., 2018; Goyal et al., 2018; Trivedi et al., 2018). We conclude the challenges in three folds. Firstly, to model the temporal dynamics, node embeddings should not be only the projections of topological structures and node features but also functions of the continuous time. Therefore, in addition to the usual vector space, temporal representation learning should be operated in some functional space as well. Secondly, graph topological structures are no longer static since the nodes and edges are evolving over time, which poses
Both authors contributed equally to this research.
1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Figure 1: Visual illustration for several complications from the temporal graphs. (A). The generation process of a temporal graph and its snapshots. It is obvious that the static graphs in the snapshots only reflect partial temporal information. (B). The final state of the temporal graph when projected to the time-independent 2-D plane. Other than the missing temporal information, the multi-edge situation arises as well. (C). When predicting the link between node A and C at time t3, the message-passing paths should be subject to temporal contraints. The solid lines give the appropriate directions, and the dashed lines violates the temporal constraints.
temporal constraints on neighborhood aggregation methods. Thirdly, node features and topological structures can exhibit temporal patterns. For example, node interactions that took place long ago may have less impact on the current topological structure and thus the node embeddings. Also, some nodes may possess features that allows them having more regular or recurrent interactions with others. We provide sketched plots for visual illustration in Figure 1. Similar to its non-temporal counterparts, in the real-world applications, models for representation learning on temporal graphs should be able to quickly generate embeddings whenever required, in an inductive fashion. GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017a) and graph attention network (GAT ) (Velickovic´ et al., 2017) are capable of inductively generating embeddings for unseen nodes based on their features, however, they do not consider the temporal factors. Most of the temporal graph embedding methods can only handle transductive tasks, since they require re-training or the computationally-expensive gradient calculations to infer embeddings for unseen nodes or node embeddings for a new timepoint. In this work, we aim at developing an architecture to inductively learn representations for temporal graphs such that the time-aware embeddings (for unseen and observed nodes) can be obtained via a single network forward pass. The key to our approach is the combination of the self-attention mechanism (Vaswani et al., 2017) and a novel functional time encoding technique derived from the Bochner's theorem from classical harmonic analysis (Loomis, 2013). The motivation for adapting self-attention to inductive representation learning on temporal graphs is to identify and capture relevant pieces of the temporal neighborhood information. Both graph convolutional network (GCN ) (Kipf & Welling, 2016a) and GAT are implicitly or explicitly assigning different weights to neighboring nodes (Velickovic´ et al., 2017) when aggregating node features. The self-attention mechanism was initially designed to recognize the relevant parts of input sequence in natural language processing. As a discrete-event sequence learning method, self-attention outputs a vector representation of the input sequence as a weighted sum of individual entry embeddings. Selfattention enjoys several advantages such as parallelized computation and interpretability (Vaswani et al., 2017). Since it captures sequential information only through the positional encoding, temporal features can not be handled. Therefore, we are motivated to replace positional encoding with some vector representation of time. Since time is a continuous variable, the mapping from the time domain to vector space has to be functional. We gain insights from harmonic analysis and propose a theoretical-grounded functional time encoding approach that is compatible with the self-attention mechanism. The temporal signals are then modelled by the interactions between the functional time encoding and nodes features as well as the graph topological structures. To evaluate our approach, we consider future link prediction on the observed nodes as transductive learning task, and on the unseen nodes as inductive learning task. We also examine the dynamic node classification task using node embeddings (temporal versus non-temporal) as features to demonstrate the usefulness of our functional time encoding. We carry out extensive ablation studies and sensitivity analysis to show the effectiveness of the proposed functional time encoding and TGAT -layer.
2

