Under consideration for publication in J. Fluid Mech.

1

Banner appropriate to article type will appear here in typeset article

arXiv:2102.01385v2 [physics.flu-dyn] 12 Apr 2021

Roughness on liquid-infused surfaces induced by capillary waves
Johan Sundin1, St´ephane Zaleski2,3 and Shervin Bagheri1
1Linn´e FLOW Centre, Dept. Engineering Mechanics, KTH, Stockholm, Sweden 2Sorbonne Universit´e & CNRS, Institut Jean Le Rond d'Alembert, UMR 7190, Paris, France 3Institut Universitaire de France, Institut Jean Le Rond d'Alembert, UMR 7190, Paris, France
(Received xx; revised xx; accepted xx)
Liquid-infused surfaces (LIS) are a promising technique for reducing friction, fouling and icing in both laminar and turbulent flows. Previous work has demonstrated that these surfaces are susceptible to shear-driven drainage. Here, we report a different failure mode using direct numerical simulations of a turbulent channel flow with liquid-infused longitudinal grooves. When the liquid-liquid surface tension is small and/or grooves are wide, we observe travelling-wave perturbations on the interface with amplitudes larger than the viscous sublayer of the turbulent flow. These capillary waves induce a roughness effect that increases drag. The generation mechanism of these waves is explained using the theory developed by Miles for gravity waves. Energy is transferred from the turbulent flow to the LIS provided that there is a negative curvature of the mean flow at the critical layer. Given the groove width, the Weber number and an estimate of the friction Reynolds number, we provide relations to determine whether a LIS behaves as a smooth or rough surface in a turbulent flow.
1. Introduction A protective and functional surface coating can be created by lubricating a textured surface with an appropriate liquid. The drag-reducing properties of these liquid-infused surfaces (LIS) have been explored recently both numerically (Fu et al. 2017; Cartagena et al. 2018; Arenas et al. 2019) and experimentally (Van Buren & Smits 2017; Fu et al. 2019). LIS can also prevent fouling (Epstein et al. 2012), corrosion (Wang et al. 2015) and ice formation (Kim et al. 2012).
The drag-reducing capabilities of LIS for liquid flows is often compared to those of superhydrophobic surfaces (SHS), where air is used as the infused medium. The low viscosity of air is beneficial for drag reduction, but the use of SHS in turbulent applications is restricted by mass diffusion (Ling et al. 2017) and instability of the gas pockets (Seo et al. 2018). For LIS, the mass diffusion is negligible if the liquids are immiscible, and LIS are not susceptible to failure due to hydrostatic pressure
 Email address for correspondence: johasu@mech.kth.se

2

J. Sundin, S. Zaleski and S. Bagheri

(Wong et al. 2011). However, also for LIS, the stability of the interface depends on the texture's geometry, the surface tension between the two liquids and the contact angle at the liquid-liquid-solid interface. In particular, these surfaces may experience shear-driven drainage of the infused liquid, but this can be mitigated, for example with chemical patterning (Wexler et al. 2015; Fu et al. 2019).
In this paper, we show that capillary motion of the liquid-liquid interface may drastically lower the drag-reducing performance of LIS. In the present study, the surface texture is fixed to longitudinal (streamwise-aligned) grooves. We use direct numerical simulations of a LIS in a liquid turbulent channel flow for frictional Reynolds numbers around Re  180. The employed volume-of-fluid (VOF) framework allows for large interface deformations (low surface tension) and moving contact lines. When the liquid-liquid surface tension is small and/or grooves are wide, we find travelling-wave perturbations on the interface with amplitudes larger than the viscous sublayer of the turbulent flow (a+  5 - 8). These capillary waves induce a roughness effect and increase friction drag.
The detrimental capillary waves develop for viscosity and density ratios of one, which excludes interface instability mechanisms driven by density and viscosity stratification (Boomkamp & Miesen 1996). Instead, we find that the linear instability can be described by the theory developed by Miles (1957) in the context of two-dimensional gravity waves. This inviscid instability is due to an energy transfer from the external flow to the waves that makes them grow in time at an exponential rate. The energy transfer can occur if (i) there is a negative curvature of the mean velocity profile where it equals the phase speed of a wave, i.e. at the critical layer and, (ii) the critical layer is not too far away from the surface, so that velocity fluctuations due to the wave (dispersive stresses) are non-zero.
The existence of energy transfer is not sufficient for failure of LIS, however. The interface fluctuations also need to grow sufficiently fast to reach large amplitudes that induce roughness effects. Figure 1a, which summarises our main contribution, shows three domains, namely rough, smooth and transitional (grey) in a plane spanned by a groove width (w+) and a Weber number (We+), both normalised with the viscous length scale. This design map is obtained from the critical-layer theory and provides a means to design LIS that can be predicted to achieve a balance between performance (large w+) and stability (smooth domain).

2. Numerical methods and configuration
We consider a fully developed turbulent open channel flow. The flow domain, shown schematically in fig. 1b, has the size (Lx, Ly, Lz) = (6.4h, h+k, 3.2h), where x, y and z correspond to the streamwise, wall-normal and spanwise directions, respectively, and h is the half-channel height. At the top boundary we impose a free-slip (symmetry) boundary condition (BC). Periodic boundary conditions are imposed in the streamwise and spanwise directions. The streamwise-aligned grooves at the bottom wall have a height k, a width w and square cross-section, k = w. The fluid-solid ratio is set to 0.5. The infused and external fluids have the same density i =  = , but different viscosities (µi and µ). We have used grooves of width w+0 = 18. Throughout this paper, +0 refers to normalisation using the friction velocity of a regular smooth wall (nominal wall units). A single superscript + refers to normalisation using the friction velocity of each individual case. The corresponding viscous length scale is  = µ/(u ), where u is the friction velocity.

