Representation Learning on Graphs with Jumping Knowledge Networks

arXiv:1806.03536v2 [cs.LG] 25 Jun 2018

Keyulu Xu 1 Chengtao Li 1 Yonglong Tian 1 Tomohiro Sonobe 2 Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi 2 Stefanie Jegelka 1

Abstract
Recent deep learning approaches for representation learning on graphs follow a neighborhood aggregation procedure. We analyze some important properties of these models, and propose a strategy to overcome those. In particular, the range of "neighboring" nodes that a node's representation draws from strongly depends on the graph structure, analogous to the spread of a random walk. To adapt to local neighborhood properties and tasks, we explore an architecture ­ jumping knowledge (JK) networks ­ that flexibly leverages, for each node, different neighborhood ranges to enable better structure-aware representation. In a number of experiments on social, bioinformatics and citation networks, we demonstrate that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance. Furthermore, combining the JK framework with models like Graph Convolutional Networks, GraphSAGE and Graph Attention Networks consistently improves those models' performance.
1. Introduction
Graphs are a ubiquitous structure that widely occurs in data analysis problems. Real-world graphs such as social networks, financial networks, biological networks and citation networks represent important rich information which is not seen from the individual entities alone, for example, the communities a person is in, the functional role of a molecule, and the sensitivity of the assets of an enterprise to external shocks. Therefore, representation learning of nodes in graphs aims to extract high-level features from a node as well as its neighborhood, and has proved extremely useful for many applications, such as node classification, clustering, and link prediction (Perozzi et al., 2014; Monti et al.,
1Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 2National Institute of Informatics, Tokyo. Correspondence to: Keyulu Xu <keyulu@mit.edu>, Stefanie Jegelka <stefje@mit.edu>. Proceedings of the 35 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80, 2018. Copyright 2018 by the author(s).

2017; Grover & Leskovec, 2016; Tang et al., 2015). Recent works focus on deep learning approaches to node representation. Many of these approaches broadly follow a neighborhood aggregation (or "message passing" scheme), and those have been very promising (Kipf & Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Gilmer et al., 2017; Velickovic´ et al., 2018; Kearnes et al., 2016). These models learn to iteratively aggregate the hidden features of every node in the graph with its adjacent nodes' as its new hidden features, where an iteration is parametrized by a layer of the neural network. Theoretically, an aggregation process of k iterations makes use of the subtree structures of height k rooted at every node. Such schemes have been shown to generalize the Weisfeiler-Lehman graph isomorphism test (Weisfeiler & Lehman, 1968) enabling to simultaneously learn the topology as well as the distribution of node features in the neighborhood (Shervashidze et al., 2011; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017). Yet, such aggregation schemes sometimes lead to surprises. For example, it has been observed that the best performance with one of the state-of-the-art models, Graph Convolutional Networks (GCN), is achieved with a 2-layer model. Deeper versions of the model that, in principle, have access to more information, perform worse (Kipf & Welling, 2017). A similar degradation of learning for computer vision problems is resolved by residual connections (He et al., 2016a) that greatly aid the training of deep models. But, even with residual connections, GCNs with more layers do not perform as well as the 2-layer GCN on many datasets, e.g. citation networks. Motivated by observations like the above, in this paper, we address two questions. First, we study properties and resulting limitations of neighborhood aggregation schemes. Second, based on this analysis, we propose an architecture that, as opposed to existing models, enables adaptive, structure-aware representations. Such representations are particularly interesting for representation learning on large complex graphs with diverse subgraph structures. Model analysis. To better understand the behavior of different neighborhood aggregation schemes, we analyze the effective range of nodes that any given node's representation draws from. We summarize this sensitivity analysis by what

Representation Learning on Graphs with Jumping Knowledge Networks

we name the influence distribution of a node. This effective range implicitly encodes prior assumptions on what are the "nearest neighbors" that a node should draw information from. In particular, we will see that this influence is heavily affected by the graph structure, raising the question whether "one size fits all", in particular in graphs whose subgraphs have varying properties (such as more tree-like or more expander-like). In particular, our more formal analysis connects influence distributions with the spread of a random walk at a given node, a well-understood phenomenon as a function of the graph structure and eigenvalues (Lova´sz, 1993). For instance, in some cases and applications, a 2-step random walk influence that focuses on local neighborhoods can be more informative than higher-order features where some of the information may be "washed out" via averaging. Changing locality. To illustrate the effect and importance of graph structure, recall that many real-world graphs possess locally strongly varying structure. In biological and citation networks, the majority of the nodes have few connections, whereas some nodes (hubs) are connected to many other nodes. Social and web networks usually consist of an expander-like core part and an almost-tree (bounded treewidth) part, which represent well-connected entities and the small communities respectively (Leskovec et al., 2009; Maehara et al., 2014; Tsonis et al., 2006). Besides node features, this subgraph structure has great impact on the result of neighborhood aggregation. The speed of expansion or, equivalently, growth of the influence radius, is characterized by the random walk's mixing time, which changes dramatically on subgraphs with different structures (Lova´sz, 1993). Thus, the same number of iterations (layers) can lead to influence distributions of very different locality. As an example, consider the social network in Figure 1 from GooglePlus (Leskovec & Mcauley, 2012). The figure illustrates the expansions of a random walk starting at the square node. The walk (a) from a node within the core rapidly includes almost the entire graph. In contrast, the walk (b) starting at a node in the tree part includes only a very small fraction of all nodes. After 5 steps, the same walk has reached the core and, suddenly, spreads quickly. Translated to graph representation models, these spreads become the influence distributions or, in other words, the averaged features yield the new feature of the walk's starting node. This shows that in the same graph, the same number of steps can lead to very different effects. Depending on the application, wide-range or smallrange feature combinations may be more desirable. A too rapid expansion may average too broadly and thereby lose information, while in other parts of the graph, a sufficient neighborhood may be needed for stabilizing predictions. JK networks. The above observations raise the question

(a) 4 steps at core (b) 4 steps at tree (c) 5 steps at tree
Figure 1. Expansion of a random walk (and hence influence distribution) starting at (square) nodes in subgraphs with different structures. Different subgraph structures result in very different neighborhood sizes.
whether it is possible to adaptively adjust (i.e., learn) the influence radii for each node and task. To achieve this, we explore an architecture that learns to selectively exploit information from neighborhoods of differing locality. This architecture selectively combines different aggregations at the last layer, i.e., the representations "jump" to the last layer. Hence, we name the resulting networks Jumping Knowledge Networks (JK-Nets). We will see that empirically, when adaptation is an option, the networks indeed learn representations of different orders for different graph substructures. Moreover, in Section 6, we show that applying our framework to various state-of-the-art neighborhood-aggregation models consistently improves their performance.
2. Background and Neighborhood aggregation schemes
We begin by summarizing some of the most common neighborhood aggregation schemes and, along the way, introduce our notation. Let G = (V, E) be a simple graph with node features Xv  Rdi for v  V . Let G be the graph obtained by adding a self-loop to every v  V . The hidden feature of node v learned by the l-th layer of the model is denoted by h(vl)  Rdh . Here, di is the dimension of the input features and dh is the dimension of the hidden features, which, for simplicity of exposition, we assume to be the same across layers. We also use hv(0) = Xv for the node feature. The neighborhood N (v) = {u  V | (v, u)  E} of node v is the set of adjacent nodes of v. The analogous neighborhood N (v) = {v}  {u  V | (v, u)  E} on G includes v.
A typical neighborhood aggregation scheme can generically be written as follows: for a k-layer model, the l-th layer (l = 1..k) updates h(vl) for every v  V simultaneously as
hv(l) =  Wl · AGGREGATE h(ul-1), u  N (v) (1)
where AGGREGATE is an aggregation function defined by the specific model, Wl is a trainable weight matrix on the lth layer shared by all nodes, and  is a non-linear activation function, e.g. a ReLU.

