Hierarchical Graph Representation Learning with Differentiable Pooling

arXiv:1806.08804v4 [cs.LG] 20 Feb 2019

Rex Ying rexying@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Christopher Morris christopher.morris@udo.edu
TU Dortmund University
William L. Hamilton wleif@stanford.edu
Stanford University

Jiaxuan You jiaxuan@stanford.edu
Stanford University
Xiang Ren xiangren@usc.edu University of Southern California
Jure Leskovec jure@cs.stanford.edu
Stanford University

Abstract
Recently, graph neural networks (GNNs) have revolutionized the field of graph representation learning through effectively learned node embeddings, and achieved state-of-the-art results in tasks such as node classification and link prediction. However, current GNN methods are inherently flat and do not learn hierarchical representations of graphs--a limitation that is especially problematic for the task of graph classification, where the goal is to predict the label associated with an entire graph. Here we propose DIFFPOOL, a differentiable graph pooling module that can generate hierarchical representations of graphs and can be combined with various graph neural network architectures in an end-to-end fashion. DIFFPOOL learns a differentiable soft cluster assignment for nodes at each layer of a deep GNN, mapping nodes to a set of clusters, which then form the coarsened input for the next GNN layer. Our experimental results show that combining existing GNN methods with DIFFPOOL yields an average improvement of 5­10% accuracy on graph classification benchmarks, compared to all existing pooling approaches, achieving a new state-of-the-art on four out of five benchmark data sets.
1 Introduction
In recent years there has been a surge of interest in developing graph neural networks (GNNs)-- general deep learning architectures that can operate over graph structured data, such as social network data [16, 22, 37] or graph-based representations of molecules [7, 11, 15]. The general approach with GNNs is to view the underlying graph as a computation graph and learn neural network primitives that generate individual node embeddings by passing, transforming, and aggregating node feature information across the graph [15, 16]. The generated node embeddings can then be used as input to any differentiable prediction layer, e.g., for node classification [16] or link prediction [33], and the whole model can be trained in an end-to-end fashion.
However, a major limitation of current GNN architectures is that they are inherently flat as they only propagate information across the edges of the graph and are unable to infer and aggregate the information in a hierarchical way. For example, in order to successfully encode the graph structure of organic molecules, one would ideally want to encode the local molecular structure (e.g., individual
Preprint. Work in progress.

Original network

Pooled network at level 1

Pooled network at level 2

Pooled network at level 3

Graph classification

Figure 1: High-level illustration of our proposed method DIFFPOOL. At each hierarchical layer, we run a GNN model to obtain embeddings of nodes. We then use these learned embeddings to cluster nodes together and run another GNN layer on this coarsened graph. This whole process is repeated for L layers and we use the final output representation to classify the graph.
atoms and their direct bonds) as well as the coarse-grained structure of the molecular graph (e.g., groups of atoms and bonds representing functional units in a molecule). This lack of hierarchical structure is especially problematic for the task of graph classification, where the goal is to predict the label associated with an entire graph. When applying GNNs to graph classification, the standard approach is to generate embeddings for all the nodes in the graph and then to globally pool all these node embeddings together, e.g., using a simple summation or neural network that operates over sets [7, 11, 15, 26]. This global pooling approach ignores any hierarchical structure that might be present in the graph, and it prevents researchers from building effective GNN models for predictive tasks over entire graphs.
Here we propose DIFFPOOL, a differentiable graph pooling module that can be adapted to various graph neural network architectures in an hierarchical and end-to-end fashion (Figure 1). DIFFPOOL allows for developing deeper GNN models that can learn to operate on hierarchical representations of a graph. We develop a graph analogue of the spatial pooling operation in CNNs [24], which allows for deep CNN architectures to iteratively operate on coarser and coarser representations of an image. The challenge in the GNN setting--compared to standard CNNs--is that graphs contain no natural notion of spatial locality, i.e., one cannot simply pool together all nodes in a "m × m patch" on a graph, because the complex topological structure of graphs precludes any straightforward, deterministic definition of a "patch". Moreover, unlike image data, graph data sets often contain graphs with varying numbers of nodes and edges, which makes defining a general graph pooling operator even more challenging.
In order to solve the above challenges, we require a model that learns how to cluster together nodes to build a hierarchical multi-layer scaffold on top of the underlying graph. Our approach DIFFPOOL learns a differentiable soft assignment at each layer of a deep GNN, mapping nodes to a set of clusters based on their learned embeddings. In this framework, we generate deep GNNs by "stacking" GNN layers in a hierarchical fashion (Figure 1): the input nodes at the layer l GNN module correspond to the clusters learned at the layer l - 1 GNN module. Thus, each layer of DIFFPOOL coarsens the input graph more and more, and DIFFPOOL is able to generate a hierarchical representation of any input graph after training. We show that DIFFPOOL can be combined with various GNN approaches, resulting in an average 7% gain in accuracy and a new state of the art on four out of five benchmark graph classification tasks. Finally, we show that DIFFPOOL can learn interpretable hierarchical clusters that correspond to well-defined communities in the input graphs.
2 Related Work
Our work builds upon a rich line of recent research on graph neural networks and graph classification.
General graph neural networks. A wide variety of graph neural network (GNN) models have been proposed in recent years, including methods inspired by convolutional neural networks [5, 8, 11, 16, 22, 25, 30, 37], recurrent neural networks [26], recursive neural networks [1, 31] and loopy belief propagation [7]. Most of these approaches fit within the framework of "neural message passing" proposed by Gilmer et al. [15]. In the message passing framework, a GNN is viewed as a
2

