Link Prediction Based on Graph Neural Networks

arXiv:1802.09691v3 [cs.LG] 20 Nov 2018

Muhan Zhang Department of CSE Washington University in St. Louis muhan@wustl.edu

Yixin Chen Department of CSE Washington University in St. Louis chen@cse.wustl.edu

Abstract
Link prediction is a key problem for network-structured data. Link prediction heuristics use some score functions, such as common neighbors and Katz index, to measure the likelihood of links. They have obtained wide practical uses due to their simplicity, interpretability, and for some of them, scalability. However, every heuristic has a strong assumption on when two nodes are likely to link, which limits their effectiveness on networks where these assumptions fail. In this regard, a more reasonable way should be learning a suitable heuristic from a given network instead of using predefined ones. By extracting a local subgraph around each target link, we aim to learn a function mapping the subgraph patterns to link existence, thus automatically learning a "heuristic" that suits the current network. In this paper, we study this heuristic learning paradigm for link prediction. First, we develop a novel -decaying heuristic theory. The theory unifies a wide range of heuristics in a single framework, and proves that all these heuristics can be well approximated from local subgraphs. Our results show that local subgraphs reserve rich information related to link existence. Second, based on the -decaying theory, we propose a new method to learn heuristics from local subgraphs using a graph neural network (GNN). Its experimental results show unprecedented performance, working consistently well on a wide range of problems.
1 Introduction
Link prediction is to predict whether two nodes in a network are likely to have a link [1]. Given the ubiquitous existence of networks, it has many applications such as friend recommendation [2], movie recommendation [3], knowledge graph completion [4], and metabolic network reconstruction [5].
One class of simple yet effective approaches for link prediction is called heuristic methods. Heuristic methods compute some heuristic node similarity scores as the likelihood of links [1, 6]. Existing heuristics can be categorized based on the maximum hop of neighbors needed to calculate the score. For example, common neighbors (CN) and preferential attachment (PA) [7] are first-order heuristics, since they only involve the one-hop neighbors of two target nodes. Adamic-Adar (AA) and resource allocation (RA) [8] are second-order heuristics, as they are calculated from up to two-hop neighborhood of the target nodes. We define h-order heuristics to be those heuristics which require knowing up to h-hop neighborhood of the target nodes. There are also some high-order heuristics which require knowing the entire network. Examples include Katz, rooted PageRank (PR) [9], and SimRank (SR) [10]. Table 3 in Appendix A summarizes eight popular heuristics.
Although working well in practice, heuristic methods have strong assumptions on when links may exist. For example, the common neighbor heuristic assumes that two nodes are more likely to connect if they have many common neighbors. This assumption may be correct in social networks, but is shown to fail in protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks ­ two proteins sharing many common neighbors are actually less likely to interact [11].
32nd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2018), Montréal, Canada.

BA
D C

B?A
Extract enclosing subgraphs
D?C

Graph neural network
common neighbors = 3 Jaccard = 0.6 preferential attachment = 16 Katz  0.03 ......
Learn graph structure features
common neighbors = 0 Jaccard = 0 preferential attachment = 8 Katz  0.001 ......

1 (link) Predict links
0 (non-link)

Figure 1: The SEAL framework. For each target link, SEAL extracts a local enclosing subgraph around it, and uses a GNN to learn general graph structure features for link prediction. Note that the heuristics listed inside the box are just for illustration ­ the learned features may be completely different from existing heuristics.

In fact, the heuristics belong to a more generic class, namely graph structure features. Graph structure features are those features located inside the observed node and edge structures of the network, which can be calculated directly from the graph. Since heuristics can be viewed as predefined graph structure features, a natural idea is to automatically learn such features from the network. Zhang and Chen [12] first studied this problem. They extract local enclosing subgraphs around links as the training data, and use a fully-connected neural network to learn which enclosing subgraphs correspond to link existence. Their method called Weisfeiler-Lehman Neural Machine (WLNM) has achieved state-of-the-art link prediction performance. The enclosing subgraph for a node pair (x, y) is the subgraph induced from the network by the union of x and y's neighbors up to h hops. Figure 1 illustrates the 1-hop enclosing subgraphs for (A, B) and (C, D). These enclosing subgraphs are very informative for link prediction ­ all first-order heuristics such as common neighbors can be directly calculated from the 1-hop enclosing subgraphs.
However, it is shown that high-order heuristics such as rooted PageRank and Katz often have much better performance than first and second-order ones [6]. To effectively learn good high-order features, it seems that we need a very large hop number h so that the enclosing subgraph becomes the entire network. This results in unaffordable time and memory consumption for most practical networks. But do we really need such a large h to learn high-order heuristics?
Fortunately, as our first contribution, we show that we do not necessarily need a very large h to learn high-order graph structure features. We dive into the inherent mechanisms of link prediction heuristics, and find that most high-order heuristics can be unified by a -decaying theory. We prove that, under mild conditions, any -decaying heuristic can be effectively approximated from an h-hop enclosing subgraph, where the approximation error decreases at least exponentially with h. This means that we can safely use even a small h to learn good high-order features. It also implies that the "effective order" of these high-order heuristics is not that high.
Based on our theoretical results, we propose a novel link prediction framework, SEAL, to learn general graph structure features from local enclosing subgraphs. SEAL fixes multiple drawbacks of WLNM. First, a graph neural network (GNN) [13, 14, 15, 16, 17] is used to replace the fully-connected neural network in WLNM, which enables better graph feature learning ability. Second, SEAL permits learning from not only subgraph structures, but also latent and explicit node features, thus absorbing multiple types of information. We empirically verified its much improved performance.
Our contributions are summarized as follows. 1) We present a new theory for learning link prediction heuristics, justifying learning from local subgraphs instead of entire networks. 2) We propose SEAL, a novel link prediction framework based on GNN (illustrated in Figure 1). SEAL outperforms all heuristic methods, latent feature methods, and recent network embedding methods by large margins. SEAL also outperforms the previous state-of-the-art method, WLNM.
2 Preliminaries
Notations Let G = (V, E) be an undirected graph, where V is the set of vertices and E  V × V is the set of observed links. Its adjacency matrix is A, where Ai,j = 1 if (i, j)  E and Ai,j = 0
2

