EvolveGCN: Evolving Graph Convolutional Networks for Dynamic Graphs
Aldo Pareja,1,2 Giacomo Domeniconi,1,2 Jie Chen,1,2 Tengfei Ma,1,2 Toyotaro Suzumura,1,2 Hiroki Kanezashi,1,2 Tim Kaler,1,3 Tao B. Schardl,1,3 Charles E. Leiserson1,3
1MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 2IBM Research, 3MIT CSAIL {Aldo.Pareja, Giacomo.Domeniconi1}@ibm.com, chenjie@us.ibm.com Tengfei.Ma1@ibm.com, {tsuzumura, hirokik}@us.ibm.com, {tfk, neboat, cel}@mit.edu

arXiv:1902.10191v3 [cs.LG] 18 Nov 2019

Abstract
Graph representation learning resurges as a trending research subject owing to the widespread use of deep learning for Euclidean data, which inspire various creative designs of neural networks in the non-Euclidean domain, particularly graphs. With the success of these graph neural networks (GNN) in the static setting, we approach further practical scenarios where the graph dynamically evolves. Existing approaches typically resort to node embeddings and use a recurrent neural network (RNN, broadly speaking) to regulate the embeddings and learn the temporal dynamics. These methods require the knowledge of a node in the full time span (including both training and testing) and are less applicable to the frequent change of the node set. In some extreme scenarios, the node sets at different time steps may completely differ. To resolve this challenge, we propose EvolveGCN, which adapts the graph convolutional network (GCN) model along the temporal dimension without resorting to node embeddings. The proposed approach captures the dynamism of the graph sequence through using an RNN to evolve the GCN parameters. Two architectures are considered for the parameter evolution. We evaluate the proposed approach on tasks including link prediction, edge classification, and node classification. The experimental results indicate a generally higher performance of EvolveGCN compared with related approaches. The code is available at https://github.com/IBM/EvolveGCN.
1 Introduction
Graphs are ubiquitous data structures that model the pairwise interactions between entities. Learning with graphs encounters unique challenges, including their combinatorial nature and the scalability bottleneck, compared with Euclidean data (e.g., images, videos, speech signals, and natural languages). With the remarkable success of deep learning for the latter data types, there exist renewed interests in the learning of graph representations (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014; Tang et al. 2015; Cao, Lu, and Xu 2015; Ou et al. 2016; Grover and Leskovec 2016) on both the node and the graph level, now parameterized by deep neural networks (Bruna et al. 2014; Duvenaud et al. 2015;
Equal contribution Contact author Copyright c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

Defferrard, Bresson, and Vandergheynst 2016; Li et al. 2016; Gilmer et al. 2017; Kipf and Welling 2017; Hamilton, Ying, and Leskovec 2017; Jin et al. 2017; Chen, Ma, and Xiao 2018; Velickovic´ et al. 2018; Gao and Ji 2019).
These neural network models generally focus on a given, static graph. In real-life applications, however, often one encounters a dynamically evolving graph. For example, users of a social network develop friendship over time; hence, the vectorial representation of the users should be updated accordingly to reflect the temporal evolution of their social relationship. Similarly, a citation network of scientific articles is constantly enriched due to frequent publications of new work citing prior art. Thus, the influence, and even sometimes the categorization, of an article varies along time. Update of the node embeddings to reflect this variation is desired. In financial networks, transactions naturally come with time stamps. The nature of a user account may change owing to the characteristics of the involved transactions (e.g., an account participates money laundering or a user becomes a victim of credit card fraud). Early detection of the change is crucial to the effectiveness of law enforcement and the minimization of loss to a financial institute. These examples urge the development of dynamic graph methods that encode the temporal evolution of relational data.
Built on the recent success of graph neural networks (GNN) for static graphs, in this work we extend them to the dynamic setting through introducing a recurrent mechanism to update the network parameters, for capturing the dynamism of the graphs. A plethora of GNNs perform information fusion through aggregating node embeddings from one-hop neighborhoods recursively. A majority of the parameters of the networks is the linear transformation of the node embeddings in each layer. We specifically focus on the graph convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf and Welling 2017) because of its simplicity and effectiveness. Then, we propose to use a recurrent neural network (RNN) to inject the dynamism into the parameters of the GCN, which forms an evolving sequence.
Work along a similar direction includes (Seo et al. 2016; Manessia, Rozza, and Manzo 2017; Narayan and Roe 2018), among others, which are based on a combination of GNNs (typically GCN) and RNNs (typically LSTM). These meth-

ods use GNNs as a feature extractor and RNNs for sequence learning from the extracted features (node embeddings). As a result, one single GNN model is learned for all graphs on the temporal axis. A limitation of these methods is that they require the knowledge of the nodes over the whole time span and can hardly promise the performance on new nodes in the future.
In practice, in addition to the likelihood that new nodes may emerge after training, nodes may also frequently appear and disappear, which renders the node embedding approaches questionable, because it is challenging for RNNs to learn these irregular behaviors. To resolve these challenges, we propose instead to use the RNN to regulate the GCN model (i.e., network parameters) at every time step. This approach effectively performs model adaptation, which focuses on the model itself rather than the node embeddings. Hence, change of nodes poses no restriction. Further, for future graphs with new nodes without historical information, the evolved GCN is still sensible for them.
Note that in the proposed method, the GCN parameters are not trained anymore. They are computed from the RNN and hence only the RNN parameters are trained. In this manner, the number of parameters (model size) does not grow with the number of time steps and the model is as manageable as a typical RNN.
2 Related Work
Methods for dynamic graphs are often extensions of those for a static one, with an additional focus on the temporal dimension and update schemes. For example, in matrix factorization-based approaches (Roweis and Saul 2000; Belkin and Niyogi 2002), node embeddings come from the (generalized) eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian matrix. Hence, DANE (Li et al. 2017) updates the eigenvectors efficiently based on the prior ones, rather than computing them from scratch for each new graph. The dominant advantage of such methods is the computational efficiency.
For random walk-based approaches (Perozzi, Al-Rfou, and Skiena 2014; Grover and Leskovec 2016), transition probabilities conditioned on history are modeled as the normalized inner products of the corresponding node embeddings. These approaches maximize the probabilities of the sampled random walks. CTDANE (Nguyen et al. 2018) extends this idea by requiring the walks to obey the temporal order. Another work, NetWalk (Yu et al. 2018), does not use the probability as the objective function; rather, it observes that if the graph does not undergo substantial changes, one only needs to resample a few walks in the successive time step. Hence, this approach incrementally retrains the model with warm starts, substantially reducing the computational cost.
The wave of deep learning introduces a flourish of unsupervised and supervised approaches for parameterizing the quantities of interest with neural networks. DynGEM (Goyal et al. 2017) is an autoencoding approach that minimizes the reconstruction loss, together with the distance between connected nodes in the embedding space. A feature of DynGEM is that the depth of the architecture is adaptive to the size of the graph; and the autoencoder learned from the past time

step is used to initialize the training of the one in the following time.
A popular category of approaches for dynamic graphs is point processes that are continuous in time. KnowEvolve (Trivedi et al. 2017) and DyRep (Trivedi et al. 2018) model the occurrence of an edge as a point process and parameterize the intensity function by using a neural network, taking node embeddings as the input. DynamicTriad (Zhou et al. 2018) uses a point process to model a more complex phenomenon--triadic closure--where a triad with three nodes is developed from an open one (a pair of nodes are not connected) to a closed one (all three pairs are connected). HTNE (Zuo et al. 2018) similarly models the dynamism by using the Hawkes process, with additionally an attention mechanism to determine the influence of historical neighbors on the current neighbors of a node. These methods are advantageous for event time prediction because of the continuous nature of the process.
A set of approaches most relevant to this work is combinations of GNNs and recurrent architectures (e.g., LSTM), whereby the former digest graph information and the latter handle dynamism. The most explored GNNs in this context are of the convolutional style and we call them graph convolutional networks (GCN), following the terminology of the related work, although in other settings GCN specifically refers to the architecture proposed by (Kipf and Welling 2017). GCRN (Seo et al. 2016) offers two combinations. The first one uses a GCN to obtain node embeddings, which are then fed into the LSTM that learns the dynamism. The second one is a modified LSTM that takes node features as input but replaces the fully connected layers therein by graph convolutions. The first idea is similarly explored in WD-GCN/CD-GCN (Manessia, Rozza, and Manzo 2017) and RgCNN (Narayan and Roe 2018). WD-GCN/CD-GCN modifies the graph convolution layers, most notably by adding a skip connection. In addition to such simple combinations, STGCN (Yu, Yin, and Zhu 2018) proposes a complex architecture that consists of so-called ST-Conv blocks. In this model, the node features must be evolving over time, since inside each ST-Conv block, a 1D convolution of the node features is first performed along the temporal dimension, followed by a graph convolution and another 1D convolution. This architecture was demonstrated for spatiotemporal traffic data (hence the names STGCN and ST-Conv), where the spatial information is handled by using graph convolutions.
3 Method
In this section we present a novel method, coined evolving graph convolutional network (EvolveGCN), that captures the dynamism underlying a graph sequence by using a recurrent model to evolve the GCN parameters. Throughout we will use subscript t to denote the time index and superscript l to denote the GCN layer index. To avoid notational cluttering, we assume that all graphs have n nodes; although we reiterate that the node sets, as well as the cardinality, may change over time. Then, at time step t, the input data consists of the pair (At  Rn×n, Xt  Rn×d), where the former is the graph (weighted) adjacency matrix and the latter is the

