SIGN: Scalable Inception Graph Neural Networks

arXiv:2004.11198v3 [cs.LG] 3 Nov 2020

Fabrizio Frasca Twitter / Imperial College London
United Kingdom

Emanuele Rossi Twitter / Imperial College London
United Kingdom

Davide Eynard Twitter
United Kingdom

Ben Chamberlain Twitter
United Kingdom

Michael M. Bronstein Twitter / Imperial College London
United Kingdom

Federico Monti Twitter
United Kingdom

Abstract
Graph representation learning has recently been applied to a broad spectrum of problems ranging from computer graphics and chemistry to high energy physics and social media. The popularity of graph neural networks has sparked interest, both in academia and in industry, in developing methods that scale to very large graphs such as Facebook or Twitter social networks. In most of these approaches, the computational cost is alleviated by a sampling strategy retaining a subset of node neighbors or subgraphs at training time. In this paper we propose a new, efficient and scalable graph deep learning architecture which sidesteps the need for graph sampling by using graph convolutional filters of different size that are amenable to efficient precomputation, allowing extremely fast training and inference. Our architecture allows using different local graph operators (e.g. motifinduced adjacency matrices or Personalized Page Rank diffusion matrix) to best suit the task at hand. We conduct extensive experimental evaluation on various open benchmarks and show that our approach is competitive with other state-ofthe-art architectures, while requiring a fraction of the training and inference time. Moreover, we obtain state-of-the-art results on ogbn-papers100M, the largest public graph dataset, with over 110 million nodes and 1.5 billion edges.
1 Introduction
Deep learning on graphs, also known as geometric deep learning (GDL) [9] or graph representation learning (GRL) [25, 5, 66], has emerged in a matter of just a few years from a niche topic to one of the most prominent fields in machine learning. Graph deep learning models have recently scored successes in various applications relying on modeling relational data, see e.g. [65, 49, 42, 14, 17, 20, 47, 68, 58, 19, 51, 43]. Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) seek to generalize classical convolutional architectures (CNNs) to graph-structured data, with a wide variety of convolution-like operations available in the literature [52, 15, 3, 45, 54, 42, 34, 59, 57, 24].
Until recently, most of the research in the field has focused on small-scale datasets, and relatively little effort has been devoted to scaling these methods to web-scale graphs such as the Facebook or Twitter social networks. Scaling is a major challenge precluding the wide application of graph deep learning methods in industrial settings. Compared to Euclidean neural networks where the training loss can be decomposed into individual samples and computed independently, graph convolutional networks diffuse information between nodes along the edges of the graph, making the loss computation interdependent for different nodes. Furthermore, in typical graphs the number of nodes grows
Equal contribution
Preprint. Under review.

exponentially with the increase of the filter receptive field, incurring significant computational and memory complexity. So far, various graph sampling approaches [24, 62, 11, 30, 12, 13, 64, 70] have been proposed as a way to alleviate the cost of training graph neural networks by selecting a small number of neighbors that reduce the computational and memory complexity.
In this paper, we take a different approach for scalable deep learning on graphs. We propose SIGN, a simple scalable Graph Neural Network architecture inspired by the inception module [56, 32]. SIGN combines graph convolutional filters of different types and sizes that are amenable to efficient precomputation, allowing extremely fast training and inference with complexity independent of the graph structure. Our architecture is able to scale to web-scale graphs without resorting to any sample technique and retaining sufficient expressiveness for effective learning: while being faster in training and, especially, inference (even one order of magnitude speedup), by employing SIGN with only one graph convolutional layer we are able to achieve results on par with state-of-the-art on several large-scale graph learning datasets. In particular, SIGN obtains state-of-the-art results on ogbn-papers100M, the largest public graph learning benchmark, with over 110 million nodes and 1.5 billion edges.
These results raise the important question on when deep graph neural network architectures are useful, especially when scalability is an important requirement, as in large-scale industrial systems. Significant effort has recently been devoted to methods allowing to design deep Graph Neural Networks with many graph convolutional layers [61, 21, 40, 67, 50], which otherwise appear difficult to train [41, 35, 60]. While there is strong evidence in favor of depth on geometric graphs [28, 40, 21], there has been almost no gain from depth on general irregular graphs like `small-world' networks [53, 50]. Given the abundance of such graphs e.g. in social network applications, it is important to take a step back and deliberate if deep architectures are the right approach. We conjecture that deep graph learning architectures are not useful for general irregular graphs and argue that future research in the field should focus on designing local more expressive operators [4, 44, 18] rather than going deeper.

2 Background and Related Work

2.1 Deep learning on graphs
The goal of graph representation learning is to construct an embedding representing the structure of the graph and the data thereon. In node-wise prediction problems, we distinguish between Transductive setting, which assumes that the entire graph is known, and thus the same graph is used during training and testing (albeit different nodes are used for training and testing), and Inductive setting, in which training and testing are performed on different graphs. A typical graph neural network architecture consists of graph Convolution-like operators (discussed in Section 2.3) performing local aggregation of features by means of message passing with the neighbor nodes, and possibly Pooling amounting to fixed [16] or learnable [63, 8] graph coarsening. Additionally, graph Sampling schemes (detailed in Section 2.4) can be employed on large-scale graphs to reduce the computational complexity.

2.2 Basic notions

Let G = (V = {1, . . . , n}, E, W) be an undirected weighted graph, represented by the symmetric

n×n matrix

adjacency matrix

D = diag(

n j=1

W, where w1j, . . . ,

wnij
j=1

> 0 if (i, j)  E and zero otherwise. The diagonal degree wnj) represents the number of neighbors of each node. We

further assume that each node is endowed with a d-dimensional feature vector and arrange all the

node features as rows of the n × d-dimensional matrix X. We denote by A = D-1/2WD-1/2 the

normalized adjacency matrix. The normalized graph Laplacian is an n × n positive semi-definite

matrix  = I - D-1/2WD-1/2.

2.3 Convolution-like operators on graphs
Spectral methods Bruna et al. [10] used the analogy between the eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian and the Fourier transform to generalize convolutional neural networks (CNN) [37] to graphs. Among the key drawbacks of this approach is a high (at least O(n2) complexity), large

2

