GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS FOR NLP: A SURVEY

arXiv:2106.06090v2 [cs.CL] 20 Oct 2022

Graph Neural Networks for Natural Language Processing: A Survey

Lingfei Wu Pinterest, USA Yu Chen Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, USA Kai Shen Zhejiang University, China
Xiaojie Guo IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, USA
Hanning Gao Central China Normal University, China Shucheng Li Nanjing University, China
Jian Pei Simon Fraser University, Canada
Bo Long JD.COM, China

LWU@EMAIL.WM.EDU HUGOCHAN2013@GMAIL.COM
SHENKAI@ZJU.EDU.CN XIAOJIE.GUO@JD.COM GHNQWERTY@GMAIL.COM SHUCHENGLI@SMAIL.NJU.EDU.CN
JPEI@CS.SFU.CA BO.LONG@JD.COM

Abstract
Deep learning has become the dominant approach in coping with various tasks in Natural Language Processing (NLP). Although text inputs are typically represented as a sequence of tokens, there is a rich variety of NLP problems that can be best expressed with a graph structure. As a result, there is a surge of interests in developing new deep learning techniques on graphs for a large number of NLP tasks. In this survey, we present a comprehensive overview on Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for Natural Language Processing. We propose a new taxonomy of GNNs for NLP, which systematically organizes existing research of GNNs for NLP along three axes: graph construction, graph representation learning, and graph based encoder-decoder models. We further introduce a large number of NLP applications that are exploiting the power of GNNs and summarize the corresponding benchmark datasets, evaluation metrics, and open-source codes. Finally, we discuss various outstanding challenges for making the full use of GNNs for NLP as well as future research directions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first comprehensive overview of Graph Neural Networks for Natural Language Processing. Keywords: Graph Neural Networks, Natural Language Processing, Deep Learning on Graphs
1. Introduction
Deep learning has become the dominant approach in coping with various tasks in Natural Language Processing (NLP) today, especially when operated on large-scale text corpora. Conventionally, text
*. Both authors contributed equally to this research. . This research is done when Kai Shen is an intern at JD.COM. . Shucheng Li is also with National Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University.
1

LINGFEI WU AND YU CHEN, ET AL.
sequences are considered as a bag of tokens such as BoW and TF-IDF in NLP tasks. With recent success of Word Embeddings techniques (Mikolov et al., 2013; Pennington et al., 2014), sentences are typically represented as a sequence of tokens in NLP tasks. Hence, popular deep learning techniques such as recurrent neural networks (Schuster and Paliwal, 1997) and convolutional neural networks (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) have been widely applied for modeling text sequence.
However, there is a rich variety of NLP problems that can be best expressed with a graph structure. For instance, the sentence structural information in text sequence (i.e. syntactic parsing trees like dependency and constituency parsing trees) can be exploited to augment original sequence data by incorporating the task-specific knowledge. Similarly, the semantic information in sequence data (i.e. semantic parsing graphs like Abstract Meaning Representation graphs and Information Extraction graphs) can be leveraged to enhance original sequence data as well. Therefore, these graphstructured data can encode complicated pairwise relationships between entity tokens for learning more informative representations.
Unfortunately, deep learning techniques that were disruptive for Euclidean data (e.g, images) or sequence data (e.g, text) are not immediately applicable to graph-structured data, due to the complexity of graph data such as irregular structure and varying size of node neighbors. As a result, this gap has driven a tide in research for deep learning on graphs, especially in development of graph neural networks (GNNs) (Wu et al., 2022; Kipf and Welling, 2016; Defferrard et al., 2016; Hamilton et al., 2017a).
This wave of research at the intersection of deep learning on graphs and NLP has influenced a variety of NLP tasks (Liu and Wu, 2022). There has seen a surge of interests in applying and developing different GNNs variants and achieved considerable success in many NLP tasks, ranging from classification tasks like sentence classification (Henaff et al., 2015; Huang and Carley, 2019), semantic role labeling (Luo and Zhao, 2020; Gui et al., 2019), and relation extraction (Qu et al., 2020; Sahu et al., 2019), to generation tasks like machine translation (Bastings et al., 2017; Beck et al., 2018a), question generation (Pan et al., 2020; Sachan et al., 2020), and summarization (Fernandes et al., 2019; Yasunaga et al., 2017). Despite the successes these existing research has achieved, deep learning on graphs for NLP still encounters many challenges, namely,
· Automatically transforming original text sequence data into highly graph-structured data. Such challenge is profound in NLP since most of the NLP tasks involving using the text sequences as the original inputs. Automatic graph construction from the text sequence to utilize the underlying structural information is a crucial step in utilizing graph neural networks for NLP problems.
· Properly determining graph representation learning techniques. It is critical to come up with specially-designed GNNs to learn the unique characteristics of different graph-structures data such as undirected, directed, multi-relational and heterogeneous graphs.
· Effectively modeling complex data. Such challenge is important since many NLP tasks involve learning the mapping between the graph-based inputs and other highly structured output data such as sequences, trees, as well as graph data with multi-types in both nodes and edges.
In this survey, we will present for the first time a comprehensive overview of Graph Neural Networks for Natural Language Processing. Our survey is timely for both Machine Learning and NLP communities, which covers relevant and interesting topics, including automatic graph construction
2

