TEMPORAL GRAPH NETWORKS FOR DEEP LEARNING ON DYNAMIC GRAPHS

Emanuele Rossi Twitter

Ben Chamberlain Twitter

Fabrizio Frasca Twitter

Davide Eynard Twitter

Federico Monti Twitter

Michael Bronstein Twitter

arXiv:2006.10637v3 [cs.LG] 9 Oct 2020

ABSTRACT
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have recently become increasingly popular due to their ability to learn complex systems of relations or interactions. These arise in a broad spectrum of problems ranging from biology and particle physics to social networks and recommendation systems. Despite the plethora of different models for deep learning on graphs, few approaches have been proposed for dealing with graphs that are dynamic in nature (e.g. evolving features or connectivity over time). We present Temporal Graph Networks (TGNs), a generic, efficient framework for deep learning on dynamic graphs represented as sequences of timed events. Thanks to a novel combination of memory modules and graph-based operators, TGNs significantly outperform previous approaches while being more computationally efficient. We furthermore show that several previous models for learning on dynamic graphs can be cast as specific instances of our framework. We perform a detailed ablation study of different components of our framework and devise the best configuration that achieves state-of-the-art performance on several transductive and inductive prediction tasks for dynamic graphs.
1 INTRODUCTION
In the past few years, graph representation learning (Bronstein et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017b; Battaglia et al., 2018) has produced a sequence of successes, gaining increasing popularity in machine learning. Graphs are ubiquitously used as models for systems of relations and interactions in many fields (Battaglia et al., 2016; Qi et al., 2018; Monti et al., 2016; Choma et al., 2018; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Gilmer et al., 2017; Parisot et al., 2018; Rossi et al., 2019), in particular, social sciences (Ying et al., 2018; Monti et al., 2019; Rossi et al., 2020) and biology (Zitnik et al., 2018; Veselkov et al., 2019; Gainza et al., 2019). Learning on such data is possible using graph neural networks (GNNs) (Hamilton et al., 2017a) that typically operate by a message passing mechanism (Battaglia et al., 2018) aggregating information in a neighborhood of a node and create node embeddings that are then used for node classification (Monti et al., 2016; Velickovic et al., 2018; Kipf & Welling, 2017), graph classification (Gilmer et al., 2017), or edge prediction (Zhang & Chen, 2018) tasks.
The majority of methods for deep learning on graphs assume that the underlying graph is static. However, most real-life systems of interactions such as social networks or biological interactomes are dynamic. While it is often possible to apply static graph deep learning models (Liben-Nowell & Kleinberg, 2007) to dynamic graphs by ignoring the temporal evolution, this has been shown to be sub-optimal (Xu et al., 2020), and in some cases, it is the dynamic structure that contains crucial insights about the system. Learning on dynamic graphs is relatively recent, and most works are limited to the setting of discrete-time dynamic graphs represented as a sequence of snapshots of the graph (Liben-Nowell & Kleinberg, 2007; Dunlavy et al., 2011; Yu et al., 2019; Sankar et al., 2020; Pareja et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2018). Such approaches are unsuitable for interesting real world settings such as social networks, where dynamic graphs are continuous (i.e. edges can appear at any time)
erossi@twitter.com
1

and evolving (i.e. new nodes join the graph continuously). Only recently, several approaches have been proposed that support the continuous-time scenario (Xu et al., 2020; Trivedi et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2019; Ma et al., 2018; Nguyen et al., 2018; Bastas et al., 2019).
Contributions. In this paper, we first propose the generic inductive framework of Temporal Graph Networks (TGNs) operating on continuous-time dynamic graphs represented as a sequence of events, and show that many previous methods are specific instances of TGNs. Second, we propose a novel training strategy allowing the model to learn from the sequentiality of the data while maintaining highly efficient parallel processing. Third, we perform a detailed ablation study of different components of our framework and analyze the tradeoff between speed and accuracy. Finally, we show state-of-the-art performance on multiple tasks and datasets in both transductive and inductive settings, while being much faster than previous methods.

2 BACKGROUND

Deep learning on static graphs. A static graph G = (V, E) comprises nodes V = {1, . . . , n} and edges E  V × V, which are endowed with features, denoted by vi and eij for all i, j = 1, . . . , n, respectively. A typical graph neural network (GNN) creates an embedding zi of the nodes by learning a local aggregation rule of the form

zi = h(mij , vi)

mij = msg(vi, vj, eij),

jNi

which is interpreted as message passing from the neighbors j of i. Here, Ni = {j : (i, j)  E} denotes the neighborhood of node i and msg and h are learnable functions.

Dynamic Graphs. There exist two main models for dynamic graphs. Discrete-time dynamic graphs (DTDG) are sequences of static graph snapshots taken at intervals in time. Continuos-time dynamic graphs (CTDG) are more general and can be represented as timed lists of events, which may include edge addition or deletion, node addition or deletion and node or edge feature transformations.
Our temporal (multi-)graph is modeled as a sequence of time-stamped events G = {x(t1), x(t2), . . .}, representing addition or change of a node or interaction between a pair of nodes at times 0  t1  t2  . . .. An event x(t) can be of two types: 1) A node-wise event is represented by vi(t), where i denotes the index of the node and v is the vector attribute associated with the event. If the index i has not been seen before, the event creates node i (with the given features), otherwise it updates the features. 2) An interaction event between nodes i and j is represented by a (directed) temporal edge eij(t) (there might be more than one edge between a pair of nodes, so technically this is a multigraph). We denote by V(T ) = {i : vi(t)  G, t  T } and E(T ) = {(i, j) : eij(t)  G, t  T } the temporal set of vertices and edges, respectively, and by Ni(T ) = {j : (i, j)  E(T )} the neighborhood of node i in time interval T . Nik(T ) denotes the k-hop neighborhood. A snapshot of the temporal graph G at time t is the (multi-)graph G(t) = (V[0, t], E[0, t]) with n(t) nodes. Deletion events are discussed in Appendix A.1.

3 TEMPORAL GRAPH NETWORKS
Following the terminology in (Kazemi et al., 2020), a neural model for dynamic graphs can be regarded as an encoder-decoder pair, where an encoder is a function that maps from a dynamic graph to node embeddings, and a decoder takes as input one or more node embeddings and makes a task-specific prediction e.g. node classification or edge prediction. The key contribution of this paper is a novel Temporal Graph Network (TGN) encoder applied on a continuous-time dynamic graph represented as a sequence of time-stamped events and producing, for each time t, the embedding of the graph nodes Z t) = (z1(t), . . . , zn(t)(t) .
3.1 CORE MODULES
Memory. The memory (state) of the model at time t consists of a vector si(t) for each node i the model has seen so far. The memory of a node is updated after an event (e.g. interaction with another node or node-wise change), and its purpose is to represent the node's history in a compressed format.

2

