Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019

arXiv:1810.00826v3 [cs.LG] 22 Feb 2019

HOW POWERFUL ARE GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS?

Keyulu Xu  MIT keyulu@mit.edu

Weihua Hu  Stanford University weihuahu@stanford.edu

Jure Leskovec Stanford University jure@cs.stanford.edu

Stefanie Jegelka MIT stefje@mit.edu

ABSTRACT
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are an effective framework for representation learning of graphs. GNNs follow a neighborhood aggregation scheme, where the representation vector of a node is computed by recursively aggregating and transforming representation vectors of its neighboring nodes. Many GNN variants have been proposed and have achieved state-of-the-art results on both node and graph classification tasks. However, despite GNNs revolutionizing graph representation learning, there is limited understanding of their representational properties and limitations. Here, we present a theoretical framework for analyzing the expressive power of GNNs to capture different graph structures. Our results characterize the discriminative power of popular GNN variants, such as Graph Convolutional Networks and GraphSAGE, and show that they cannot learn to distinguish certain simple graph structures. We then develop a simple architecture that is provably the most expressive among the class of GNNs and is as powerful as the WeisfeilerLehman graph isomorphism test. We empirically validate our theoretical findings on a number of graph classification benchmarks, and demonstrate that our model achieves state-of-the-art performance.
1 INTRODUCTION
Learning with graph structured data, such as molecules, social, biological, and financial networks, requires effective representation of their graph structure (Hamilton et al., 2017b). Recently, there has been a surge of interest in Graph Neural Network (GNN) approaches for representation learning of graphs (Li et al., 2016; Hamilton et al., 2017a; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Velickovic et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018). GNNs broadly follow a recursive neighborhood aggregation (or message passing) scheme, where each node aggregates feature vectors of its neighbors to compute its new feature vector (Xu et al., 2018; Gilmer et al., 2017). After k iterations of aggregation, a node is represented by its transformed feature vector, which captures the structural information within the node's k-hop neighborhood. The representation of an entire graph can then be obtained through pooling (Ying et al., 2018), for example, by summing the representation vectors of all nodes in the graph.
Many GNN variants with different neighborhood aggregation and graph-level pooling schemes have been proposed (Scarselli et al., 2009b; Battaglia et al., 2016; Defferrard et al., 2016; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Hamilton et al., 2017a; Kearnes et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2017; Li et al., 2016; Velickovic et al., 2018; Santoro et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018; Santoro et al., 2018; Verma & Zhang, 2018; Ying et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2018). Empirically, these GNNs have achieved state-of-the-art performance in many tasks such as node classification, link prediction, and graph classification. However, the design of new GNNs is mostly based on empirical intuition, heuristics, and experimental trial-anderror. There is little theoretical understanding of the properties and limitations of GNNs, and formal analysis of GNNs' representational capacity is limited.
Equal contribution. Work partially performed while in Tokyo, visiting Prof. Ken-ichi Kawarabayashi. Work partially performed while at RIKEN AIP and University of Tokyo.
1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019

Here, we present a theoretical framework for analyzing the representational power of GNNs. We formally characterize how expressive different GNN variants are in learning to represent and distinguish between different graph structures. Our framework is inspired by the close connection between GNNs and the Weisfeiler-Lehman (WL) graph isomorphism test (Weisfeiler & Lehman, 1968), a powerful test known to distinguish a broad class of graphs (Babai & Kucera, 1979). Similar to GNNs, the WL test iteratively updates a given node's feature vector by aggregating feature vectors of its network neighbors. What makes the WL test so powerful is its injective aggregation update that maps different node neighborhoods to different feature vectors. Our key insight is that a GNN can have as large discriminative power as the WL test if the GNN's aggregation scheme is highly expressive and can model injective functions.
To mathematically formalize the above insight, our framework first represents the set of feature vectors of a given node's neighbors as a multiset, i.e., a set with possibly repeating elements. Then, the neighbor aggregation in GNNs can be thought of as an aggregation function over the multiset. Hence, to have strong representational power, a GNN must be able to aggregate different multisets into different representations. We rigorously study several variants of multiset functions and theoretically characterize their discriminative power, i.e., how well different aggregation functions can distinguish different multisets. The more discriminative the multiset function is, the more powerful the representational power of the underlying GNN.
Our main results are summarized as follows:
1) We show that GNNs are at most as powerful as the WL test in distinguishing graph structures.
2) We establish conditions on the neighbor aggregation and graph readout functions under which the resulting GNN is as powerful as the WL test.
3) We identify graph structures that cannot be distinguished by popular GNN variants, such as GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017) and GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017a), and we precisely characterize the kinds of graph structures such GNN-based models can capture.
4) We develop a simple neural architecture, Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN), and show that its discriminative/representational power is equal to the power of the WL test.
We validate our theory via experiments on graph classification datasets, where the expressive power of GNNs is crucial to capture graph structures. In particular, we compare the performance of GNNs with various aggregation functions. Our results confirm that the most powerful GNN by our theory, i.e., Graph Isomorphism Network (GIN), also empirically has high representational power as it almost perfectly fits the training data, whereas the less powerful GNN variants often severely underfit the training data. In addition, the representationally more powerful GNNs outperform the others by test set accuracy and achieve state-of-the-art performance on many graph classification benchmarks.

2 PRELIMINARIES

We begin by summarizing some of the most common GNN models and, along the way, introduce our notation. Let G = (V, E) denote a graph with node feature vectors Xv for v  V . There are two tasks of interest: (1) Node classification, where each node v  V has an associated label yv and the goal is to learn a representation vector hv of v such that v's label can be predicted as yv = f (hv); (2) Graph classification, where, given a set of graphs {G1, ..., GN }  G and their labels {y1, ..., yN }  Y, we aim to learn a representation vector hG that helps predict the label of an entire graph, yG = g(hG).
Graph Neural Networks. GNNs use the graph structure and node features Xv to learn a representation vector of a node, hv, or the entire graph, hG. Modern GNNs follow a neighborhood aggregation strategy, where we iteratively update the representation of a node by aggregating representations of its neighbors. After k iterations of aggregation, a node's representation captures the structural information within its k-hop network neighborhood. Formally, the k-th layer of a GNN is

a(vk) = AGGREGATE(k)

h(uk-1) : u  N (v)

, h(vk) = COMBINE(k) h(vk-1), av(k) , (2.1)

where hv(k) is the feature vector of node v at the k-th iteration/layer. We initialize hv(0) = Xv, and N (v) is a set of nodes adjacent to v. The choice of AGGREGATE(k)(·) and COMBINE(k)(·) in

2

