Hierarchical Graph Network for Multi-hop Question Answering
Yuwei Fang, Siqi Sun, Zhe Gan, Rohit Pillai, Shuohang Wang, Jingjing Liu Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research
{yuwfan,siqi.sun,zhe.gan,rohit.pillai,shuohang.wang,jingjl}@microsoft.com

arXiv:1911.03631v4 [cs.CL] 6 Oct 2020

Abstract

In this paper, we present Hierarchical Graph Network (HGN) for multi-hop question answering. To aggregate clues from scattered texts across multiple paragraphs, a hierarchical graph is created by constructing nodes on different levels of granularity (questions, paragraphs, sentences, entities), the representations of which are initialized with pre-trained contextual encoders. Given this hierarchical graph, the initial node representations are updated through graph propagation, and multihop reasoning is performed via traversing through the graph edges for each subsequent sub-task (e.g., paragraph selection, supporting facts extraction, answer prediction). By weaving heterogeneous nodes into an integral unified graph, this hierarchical differentiation of node granularity enables HGN to support different question answering sub-tasks simultaneously. Experiments on the HotpotQA benchmark demonstrate that the proposed model achieves new state of the art, outperforming existing multi-hop QA approaches.1

Figure 1: An example of multi-hop question answering from HotpotQA. The model needs to identify relevant paragraphs, determine supporting facts, and then predict the answer correctly.

1 Introduction
In contrast to one-hop question answering (Rajpurkar et al., 2016; Trischler et al., 2016; Lai et al., 2017) where answers can be derived from a single paragraph (Wang and Jiang, 2017; Seo et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2019), many recent studies on question answering focus on multi-hop reasoning across multiple documents or paragraphs. Popular tasks include WikiHop (Welbl et al., 2018), ComplexWebQuestions (Talmor and Berant, 2018), and HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018).
An example from HotpotQA is illustrated in Figure 1. In order to correctly answer the question ("The director of the romantic comedy `Big Stone Gap' is based in what New York city"), the model is
1Code will be released at https://github.com/yuwfan/HGN.

required to first identify P1 as a relevant paragraph, whose title contains the keywords that appear in the question ("Big Stone Gap"). S1, the first sentence of P1, is then chosen by the model as a supporting fact that leads to the next-hop paragraph P2. Lastly, from P2, the span "Greenwich Village, New York City" is selected as the predicted answer.
Most existing studies use a retriever to find paragraphs that contain the right answer to the question (P1 and P2 in this case). A Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC) model is then applied to the selected paragraphs for answer prediction (Nishida et al., 2019; Min et al., 2019b). However, even after successfully identifying a reasoning chain through multiple paragraphs, it still remains a critical challenge how to aggregate evidence from scattered

sources on different granularity levels (e.g., paragraphs, sentences, entities) for joint answer and supporting facts prediction.
To better leverage fine-grained evidences, some studies apply entity graphs through query-guided multi-hop reasoning. Depending on the characteristics of the dataset, answers can be selected either from entities in the constructed entity graph (Song et al., 2018; Dhingra et al., 2018; De Cao et al., 2019; Tu et al., 2019; Ding et al., 2019), or from spans in documents by fusing entity representations back into token-level document representation (Xiao et al., 2019). However, the constructed graph is mostly used for answer prediction only, while insufficient for finding supporting facts. Also, reasoning through a simple entity graph (Ding et al., 2019) or paragraph-entity hybrid graph (Tu et al., 2019) lacks the ability to support complicated questions that require multi-hop reasoning.
Intuitively, given a question that requires multiple hops through a set of documents to reach the right answer, a model needs to: (i) identify paragraphs relevant to the question; (ii) determine strong supporting evidence in those paragraphs; and (iii) pinpoint the right answer following the garnered evidence. To this end, Graph Neural Network with its inherent message passing mechanism that can pass on multi-hop information through graph propagation, has great potential of effectively predicting both supporting facts and answer simultaneously for complex multi-hop questions.
Motivated by this, we propose a Hierarchical Graph Network (HGN) for multi-hop question answering, which empowers joint answer/evidence prediction via multi-level fine-grained graphs in a hierarchical framework. Instead of only using entities as nodes, for each question we construct a hierarchical graph to capture clues from sources with different levels of granularity. Specifically, four types of graph node are introduced: questions, paragraphs, sentences and entities (see Figure 2). To obtain contextualized representations for these hierarchical nodes, large-scale pre-trained language models such as BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) and RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) are used for contextual encoding. These initial representations are then passed through a Graph Neural Network for graph propagation. The updated node representations are then exploited for different sub-tasks (e.g., paragraph selection, supporting facts prediction, entity prediction). Since answers may not be entities in

the graph, a span prediction module is also introduced for final answer prediction.
The main contributions of this paper are threefold: (i) We propose a Hierarchical Graph Network (HGN) for multi-hop question answering, where heterogeneous nodes are woven into an integral hierarchical graph. (ii) Nodes from different granularity levels mutually enhance each other for different sub-tasks, providing effective supervision signals for both supporting facts extraction and answer prediction. (iii) On the HotpotQA benchmark, the proposed model achieves new state of the art in both Distractor and Fullwiki settings.
2 Related Work
Multi-Hop QA Multi-hop question answering requires a model to aggregate scattered pieces of evidence across multiple documents to predict the right answer. WikiHop (Welbl et al., 2018) and HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018) are two recent datasets designed for this purpose. Existing work on HotpotQA Distractor setting focuses on converting the multi-hop reasoning task into single-hop subproblems. Specifically, QFE (Nishida et al., 2019) regards evidence extraction as a query-focused summarization task, and reformulates the query in each hop. DecompRC (Min et al., 2019b) decomposes a compositional question into simpler sub-questions and leverages single-hop MRC models to answer the sub-questions. A neural modular network is also proposed in Jiang and Bansal (2019b), where neural modules are dynamically assembled for more interpretable multi-hop reasoning. Recent studies (Chen and Durrett, 2019; Min et al., 2019a; Jiang and Bansal, 2019a) have also studied the multi-hop reasoning behaviors that models have learned in the task.
Graph Neural Network Recent studies on multi-hop QA also build graphs based on entities and reasoning over the constructed graph using graph neural networks (Kipf and Welling, 2017; Velickovic´ et al., 2018). MHQA-GRN (Song et al., 2018) and Coref-GRN (Dhingra et al., 2018) construct an entity graph based on co-reference resolution or sliding windows. Entity-GCN (De Cao et al., 2019) considers three different types of edges that connect different entities in the entity graph. HDE-Graph (Tu et al., 2019) enriches information in the entity graph by adding document nodes and creating interactions among documents, entities and answer candidates. Cognitive Graph QA (Ding

