Gravitational Collapse in the Post-Inflationary Universe
Benedikt Eggemeier,1,  Bodo Schwabe,1, 2,  Jens C. Niemeyer,1,  and Richard Easther3, § 1Institut fu¨r Astrophysik, Georg-August-Universit¨at G¨ottingen, D-37077 Go¨ttingen, Germany 2CAPA & Departamento de F´isica Teo´rica, Universidad de Zaragoza, 50009 Zaragoza 3Department of Physics, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealand (Dated: January 14, 2022)
The Universe may pass through an effectively matter-dominated epoch between inflation and Big Bang Nucleosynthesis during which gravitationally bound structures can form on subhorizon scales. In particular, the inflaton field can collapse into inflaton halos, forming "large scale" structure in the very early universe. We combine N-body simulations with high-resolution zoom-in regions in which the non-relativistic Schro¨dinger-Poisson equations are used to resolve the detailed, wavelike structure of inflaton halos. Solitonic cores form inside them, matching structure formation simulations with axion-like particles in the late-time universe. We denote these objects inflaton stars, by analogy with boson stars. Based on a semi-analytic formalism we compute their overall mass distribution which shows that some regions will reach overdensities of 1015 if the early matterdominated epoch lasts for 20 e-folds. The radii of the most massive inflaton stars can shrink below the Schwarzschild radius, suggesting that they could form primordial black holes prior to thermalization.

arXiv:2110.15109v2 [astro-ph.CO] 13 Jan 2022

I. INTRODUCTION
Cosmological inflation [1­4] is a period of accelerated expansion in the early Universe. In simple scenarios this phase ends with the scalar inflaton field oscillating about the (possibly local) minimum of its potential. A fully viable inflationary model must contain a mechanism that converts the energy-density represented by the resulting inflaton condensate into Standard Model particles, thermalizing the universe at temperatures high enough to allow neutrino freeze-out and nucleosynthesis.
Many mechanisms could accomplish this task, given that in simple scenarios inflation typically ends with densities near the Grand Unification scale but thermalization is not absolutely required until interaction energies approach MeV scales. In practice, thermalization is usually assumed to occur at the TeV scale or above, given that baryogenesis and dark matter production must occur prior to nucleosynthesis, and both processes presumably involve physics beyond the Standard Model. However, even in this case characteristic energies could vary by a factor of 1012 between the end of inflation and the onset of thermalization.
A number of mechanisms can fragment the initially near-homogeneous, oscillating inflaton condensate. Quanta of fields coupled to the inflaton or the inflaton itself can be produced by resonance [5­7], leading to quasiexponential growth in the occupation numbers of specific ranges of momentum modes, rendering the early universe highly inhomogeneous. These "preheating" mechanisms typically produce a non-thermal initial distribution which would then be thermalized by their mutual inter-
 benedikt.eggemeier@phys.uni-goettingen.de  bschwabe@unizar.es  jens.niemeyer@phys.uni-goettingen.de § r.easther@auckland.ac.nz

actions [8]. In addition, resonance can lead to long-lived collective excitations such as oscillons [9­13] which are stable on scales much longer than the post-inflationary Hubble time.
In this work, we focus on scenarios in which the primary inflaton interactions are gravitational. In these cases, inflation is followed by an extended period of early matter domination (EMD); integrating out the rapid inflaton oscillations leads to an effective description of density perturbations on a non-relativistic, matterdominated background. Small perturbations in the inflaton condensate become gravitationally unstable inside the Hubble horizon and collapse [14, 15], eventually forming bound structures [16­18].
It is possible that this era supports a lengthy period during which the local gravitational dynamics are nonlinear, leading to large overdensities [17, 18]. These structures are necessarily evanescent, since thermalization must convert all remnant inflaton material into Standard Model particles and dark matter. The details of this phase are convolved with the predicted values of observables associated with primordial perturbations [19­21]. Furthermore, this complex nonlinear phase could conceivably source stochastic gravitational waves via merging halos, primordial black hole formation, as well as inhomogeneous reheating prior to nucleosynthesis.
Given that this epoch involves fully nonlinear gravitational clustering three-dimensional simulations are required to model its detailed evolution. The nonrelativistic description of a generic self-gravitating scalar field is provided by the Schr¨odinger-Poisson equations. Gravitational clustering in the post-inflationary epoch was first demonstrated in Ref. [16] by numerically solving the Schr¨odinger-Poisson equations on a comoving background. As with axion-like or fuzzy dark matter (FDM) [22] structure formation simulations, the need to spatially resolve the de Broglie wavelength limits the achievable simulation volume [23, 24]. On scales far

2

greater than the de Broglie length, the coarse grained behavior of scalar fields converges to that of collisionless particles [25, 26], allowing the use of standard N-body methods if only large-scale dynamics are of interest. The large-scale correspondence between the coarse grained Schr¨odinger-Poisson and the Vlasov-Poisson equations was exploited to analyse the gravitational fragmentation of the inflaton field after inflation in Ref. [18]. Large N-body simulations showed that the inflaton condensate collapses into gravitationally bound inflaton halos, reaching masses of up to 20 kg with radii of the order of 10-20 m. The resulting inflaton halo mass function (IHMF) is consistent with results from Press-Schechter theory [17].
N-body methods are computationally efficient but do not capture phenomena arising from wave interference patterns, whose characteristic scale is set by the de Broglie wavelength. These include the formation of gravitationally bound solitonic objects equivalent to nonrelativistic Bose stars. These have received attention in the context of FDM structure formation [23, 27­31] and QCD axion minihalos [32­35] where they are known as solitonic halo cores and (dilute) axion stars, respectively. The similarity of initial conditions on sub-horizon scales ­ a homogeneous, cold field with small density perturbations ­ suggests that the Schro¨dinger-Poisson dynamics of the inflaton field during EMD give rise to equivalent bound structures, referred to as inflaton stars in Ref. [17].
Confirming this hypothesis requires simulations using the Schro¨dinger-Poisson equations on small scales with appropriate initial conditions for mass density and momentum in a cosmological box large enough to follow the evolution of structures akin to the present-day cosmic web. The analogous problem in the context of FDM structure formation was solved by using a hybrid approach with adaptive-mesh refinement (AMR) techniques [29]. Using an N-body particle representation of the scalar field on coarse grid levels and only solving the Schr¨odinger-Poisson equations in isolated, highly refined regions surrounding pre-selected halos made it possible to observe the formation and growth of solitonic cores from cosmological initial conditions.
We use the same hybrid methods to extend our previous N-body simulations of the early matter-dominated post-inflationary era [18] to much smaller length scales. This confirms the formation of inflaton stars at the center of inflaton halos during EMD. Using the IHMF from our previous N-body simulations and the knowledge that these solitons are in virial equilibrium with their host halos we determine the inflaton star mass function (ISMF) and find that it can be well approximated by a modified Press-Schechter approach [36]. With overdensities of up to 1015 the existence of inflaton stars might lead to new possible observational hints of the early matterdominated epoch. If the universe thermalizes at the TeV scale, typical overdensities of 1032 will be reached and the most massive inflaton stars can collapse into primordial black holes (PBHs).

The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section II we review the formation of gravitational bound structures after inflation and describe our numerical methods and simulation setup. We present our results in Section III. The mass distribution of inflaton stars and the possible formation of black holes is discussed in Section IV. We conclude in Section V.

II. SIMULATION SETUP AND NUMERICAL METHODS

In single-field models the accelerated expansion of the Universe is driven by the scalar inflaton field  with potential V (). In the homogeneous limit of a flat Friedmann-Lemaitre-Robertson-Walker (FLRW) spacetime, the inflaton obeys the Klein-Gordon equation

dV

¨ + 3H + = 0 ,

(1)

d

while the Friedmann equation

H2

=

1 3MP2l

1  2 + V () 2

(2)

describes the expansion of space. Here, MPl = (8G)-1/2 is the reduced Planck mass and H = a /a the Hubble parameter with scale factor a.
After slow-roll inflation, the homogeneous inflaton condensate oscillates around its potential minimum. While the full potential must be shallower than quadratic at large field values  > MPl for compatibility with observations [37], most inflationary potentials can be described by V ()  2 around potential minima, or

V () = 1 m22 .

(3)

2

The power spectrum of density perturbations for this potential decays as k-5 on subhorizon scales [14, 18].
Assuming that the full potential does not support resonance and solving Eq. (1) we find that in the quadratic limit the inflaton field evolves as   sin(mt)/t in the post-inflationary epoch. Furthermore, the scale factor behaves as a(t)  t2/3 and the Hubble parameter decreases as H  a-3/2, similar to the expansion in a matter-dominated universe [38].
If the inflaton coupling to other fields is small, this matter-dominated era can last for multiple e-folds. For example with a reheating temperature of Trh 107 GeV, the universe grows by 24 e-folds [18]. During this period, sub-horizon density perturbations grow linearly with the scale factor and eventually collapse into gravitationally bound structures [14, 15].
At the end of slow-roll inflation, end  MPl and thus Hend  m, so that a few e-folds after the end of inflation we have m H, allowing the non-relativistic approximation of the Klein-Gordon equation on subhorizon scales. Additionally, large occupation numbers allow a classical

