arXiv:2303.09777v1 [physics.acc-ph] 17 Mar 2023

Multiplexed Photoinjector Optimization for High-Repetition-Rate Free-Electron Lasers
Zhen Zhang , Yuantao Ding , Zhirong Huang and Feng Zhou SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA Correspondence*: Zhen Zhang zzhang@slac.stanford.edu
ABSTRACT
The multiplexing capabilities of superconducting X-ray free-electron lasers (FELs) have gained much attention in recent years. The demanding requirements for photon properties from multiple undulator lines necessitate more flexible beam manipulation techniques to achieve the goal of "beam on demand". In this paper, we investigate a multiplexed configuration for the photoinjector of high-repetition-rate FELs that aims to simultaneously provide low-emittance electron beams of different charges. A parallel, multi-objective genetic algorithm is implemented for the photoinjector parameter optimization. The proposed configuration could drastically enhance the flexibility of beam manipulation to improve multiplexing capabilities and realize the full potential of the facility.
Keywords: free-electron laser, beam on demand, multiplexing capability, photoinjector, VHF gun, genetic algorithm
1 INTRODUCTION
Recently there is increasing interest in the multiplexing capabilities of high-repetition-rate X-ray freeelectron lasers (FELs) across the community as the development of superconducting radio-frequency (SRF) linac based FEL facilities such as LCLS-II [Raubenheimer et al. (2015)] and its high energy upgrade [Raubenheimer et al. (2018)], SHINE [Zhu et al. (2017)] and European XFEL [Decking et al. (2020)]. The high-repetition rate of electron beams up to megahertz (MHz) in these facilities make it feasible to feed multiple undulator lines simultaneously, significantly increasing the user experiment time. The concept of generating bunches with different properties to drive more than one FELs in parallel has been already done both at superconducting FELs [Faatz et al. (2016); Fro¨hlich et al. (2019)] and normal conducting FELs [Paraliev et al. (2022)]. However, the wide range of photon property requirements from multiple undulator lines presents a major challenge for satisfying these requirements with a single photoinjector and SRF linac.
To achieve the full potential of high-repetition-rate FEL facilities such as LCLS-II, the concept of "beam on demand" has been proposed to provide tailored beam properties for each undulator line at the desired repetition rate [Zhang et al. (2021)]. These properties include, but are not limited to, beam current, bunch length, beam charge, beam energy, and energy chirp. To achieve shot-by-shot control of bunch length and peak current, a continuous-wave (CW) normal conducting cavity, called a "chirper", which is located upstream of the first magnetic chicane, has been proposed and studied [Nasr et al. (2016); Zhang et al. (2023)]. Different methods have been explored to produce the desired beam energy for each beamline from a single SRF linac, such as using an achromatic and isochronous electron delay system and fast kickers [Yan and Deng (2019)] or off-frequency detuning in SRF cavities [Zhang et al. (2019)]. Laser heater shaping allows for customized shaping of the beam's slice energy spread, resulting in various beam current profiles for different applications [Marinelli et al. (2016); Roussel et al. (2015); Cesar et al. (2021)]. It's
1

Zhang et al.

worth noting that all these techniques are performed after the photoinjector and assume consistent beam properties at the photoinjector exit for all shots.
The photoinjector is the low energy ( 100 MeV) part of the accelerator, where space charge effects and non-relativistic kinematics play an critical and even dominant role. The photoinjector is usually optimized for a specific beam charge, but changing the beam charge requires re-optimization of the entire injector settings. To achieve the goal of "beam charge on demand", a multiplexed configuration for photoinjector is needed to preserve low emittance for different beam charges at the same time. Due to the intensity of space charge, most of the parameters in the photoinjector are nonlinearly coupled. In this paper, a simulation code, ASTRA, which has been extensively tested against experiments and other codes [Flottmann (1997)], is used to model the beam dynamics in the photoinjector. A multi-objective genetic optimizer based on the continuous non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II) [Deb et al. (2002)] is used for the parameter optimizations of photoinjector. NSGA-II is a popular evolutionary algorithm that is widely used in various fields, including engineering, finance, and computer science. NSGA-II can handle multiple objectives and constraints simultaneously, and can effectively generate a set of Pareto-optimal solutions, which are the optimal solutions that cannot be improved in one objective without worsening another objective. The choice of population size in NSGA-II algorithm depends on several factors, including the complexity of the problem, the number of objectives, and the available computational resources. A larger population size can lead to better diversity in the population, which can improve the convergence and quality of the optimization results. However, a larger population size also requires more computational resources and longer computation time. This method has been widely adopted in the field of accelerator during the last decades [Bazarov and Sinclair (2005); Hajima and Nagai (2006); Hofler et al. (2013); Papadopoulos et al. (2014); Chen et al. (2022); Zhu et al. (2022); Neveu et al. (2023)]. In this study, the population size of each generation is set to be 128, taking into account the decision variables of photoinjector optimization and the available computational resources.
The paper is structured as follows: in Sec. 2, we will present the optimized results of the LCLSII photoinjector for three typical beam charges as a baseline. The method to optimize multiplexed configurations is described in Sec. 3, including the optimal results of three multiplexed configurations with different customized knobs. Finally, in Sec. 4, we provide some discussion and concluding remarks.
2 BASELINE OF LCLS-II PHOTOINJECTOR
To illustrate the proposed multiplexed configuration for the photoinjector, we first show the optimization results for different beam charges individually optimized with the same input variables, serving as the facility's baseline. We use the photoinjector of LCLS-II as an example in the following simulations, which is depicted in Figure 1. The photoinjector consists primarily of a very-high-frequency (VHF) gun, two solenoids (labeled SOL1 and SOL2), a 2-cell normal conducting continuous-wave 1.3 GHz buncher cavity, and eight 9-cell 1.3 GHz cavities (labeled 1 to 8). The RF gun is a replica of the APEX [Sannibale et al. (2012)] gun developed at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, which allows LCLS-II to operate in continuous-wave mode with an electron beam repetition rate of 1 MHz. The drive laser used for generating electrons at the Cs2Te cathode is an ultraviolet laser at 257.5 nm, a fourth harmonic from an infrared laser operating at 1030 nm [Gilevich et al. (2020)]. The longitudinal profile of the laser pulse can have either a Gaussian or uniform distribution. The implementation of the latter relies on successful laser pulse shaping to suppress any initial density modulation, as failure to do so may introduce a strong microbunching instability in the accelerator [Huang et al. (2004)] In this study, we assume a uniform transverse and longitudinal laser density profile. The laser spot radius and pulse duration are also considered as optimization variables. The

Frontiers

2

