Heterogeneous Graph Transformer

arXiv:2003.01332v1 [cs.LG] 3 Mar 2020

Ziniu Hu
University of California, Los Angeles bull@cs.ucla.edu
Kuansan Wang
Microsoft Research, Redmond kuansanw@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
Recent years have witnessed the emerging success of graph neural networks (GNNs) for modeling structured data. However, most GNNs are designed for homogeneous graphs, in which all nodes and edges belong to the same types, making them infeasible to represent heterogeneous structures. In this paper, we present the Heterogeneous Graph Transformer (HGT) architecture for modeling Web-scale heterogeneous graphs. To model heterogeneity, we design node- and edge-type dependent parameters to characterize the heterogeneous attention over each edge, empowering HGT to maintain dedicated representations for different types of nodes and edges. To handle dynamic heterogeneous graphs, we introduce the relative temporal encoding technique into HGT, which is able to capture the dynamic structural dependency with arbitrary durations. To handle Web-scale graph data, we design the heterogeneous mini-batch graph sampling algorithm--HGSampling--for efficient and scalable training. Extensive experiments on the Open Academic Graph of 179 million nodes and 2 billion edges show that the proposed HGT model consistently outperforms all the state-of-the-art GNN baselines by 9%­21% on various downstream tasks. The dataset and source code of HGT are publicly available at https://github.com/acbull/pyHGT.
KEYWORDS
Graph Neural Networks; Heterogeneous Information Networks; Representation Learning; Graph Embedding; Graph Attention
ACM Reference Format: Ziniu Hu, Yuxiao Dong, Kuansan Wang, and Yizhou Sun. 2020. Heterogeneous Graph Transformer. In Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020 (WWW '20), April 20­24, 2020, Taipei, Taiwan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3366423.3380027
1 INTRODUCTION
Heterogeneous graphs have been commonly used for abstracting and modeling complex systems, in which objects of different types
This work was done when Ziniu was an intern at Microsoft Research.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. WWW '20, April 20­24, 2020, Taipei, Taiwan © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-7023-3/20/04. https://doi.org/10.1145/3366423.3380027

Yuxiao Dong
Microsoft Research, Redmond yuxdong@microsoft.com
Yizhou Sun
University of California, Los Angeles yzsun@cs.ucla.edu
Figure 1: The schema and meta relations of Open Academic Graph (OAG). Given a Web-scale heterogeneous graph, e.g., an academic network, HGT takes only its one-hop edges as input without manually designing meta paths.
interact with each other in various ways. Some prevalent instances of such systems include academic graphs, Facebook entity graph, LinkedIn economic graph, and broadly the Internet of Things network. For example, the Open Academic Graph (OAG) [28] in Figure 1 contains five types of nodes: papers, authors, institutions, venues (journal, conference, or preprint), and fields, as well as different types of relationships between them.
Over the past decade, a significant line of research has been explored for mining heterogeneous graphs [17]. One of the classical paradigms is to define and use meta paths to model heterogeneous structures, such as PathSim [18] and metapath2vec [3]. Recently, in view of graph neural networks' (GNNs) success [7, 9, 22], there are several attempts to adopt GNNs to learn with heterogeneous networks [14, 23, 26, 27]. However, these works face several issues: First, most of them involve the design of meta paths for each type of heterogeneous graphs, requiring specific domain knowledge; Second, they either simply assume that different types of nodes/edges share the same feature and representation space or keep distinct non-sharing weights for either node type or edge type alone, making them insufficient to capture heterogeneous graphs' properties; Third, most of them ignore the dynamic nature of every (heterogeneous) graph; Finally, their intrinsic design and implementation make them incapable of modeling Web-scale heterogeneous graphs.
Take OAG for example: First, the nodes and edges in OAG could have different feature distributions, e.g., papers have text features whereas institutions may have features from affiliated scholars, and coauthorships obviously differ from citation links; Second, OAG has been consistently evolving, e.g., 1) the volume of publications doubles every 12 years [4], and 2) the KDD conference was more related to database in the 1990s whereas more to machine learning in recent years; Finally, OAG contains hundreds of millions of nodes

WWW '20, April 20­24, 2020, Taipei, Taiwan

Ziniu Hu, Yuxiao Dong, Kuansan Wang, and Yizhou Sun

and billions of relationships, leaving existing heterogeneous GNNs not scalable for handling it.
In light of these limitations and challenges, we propose to study heterogeneous graph neural networks with the goal of maintaining node- and edge-type dependent representations, capturing network dynamics, avoiding customized meta paths, and being scalable to Web-scale graphs. In this work, we present the Heterogeneous Graph Transformer (HGT) architecture to deal with all these issues.
To handle graph heterogeneity, we introduce the node- and edgetype dependent attention mechanism. Instead of parameterizing each type of edges, the heterogeneous mutual attention in HGT is defined by breaking down each edge e = (s, t) based on its meta relation triplet, i.e.,  node type of s, edge type of e between s & t, node type of t. Figure 1 illustrates the meta relations of heterogeneous academic graphs. In specific, we use these meta relations to parameterize the weight matrices for calculating attention over each edge. As a result, nodes and edges of different types are allowed to maintain their specific representation spaces. Meanwhile, connected nodes in different types can still interact, pass, and aggregate messages without being restricted by their distribution gaps. Due to the nature of its architecture, HGT can incorporate information from high-order neighbors of different types through message passing across layers, which can be regarded as "soft" meta paths. That said, even if HGT take only its one-hop edges as input without manually designing meta paths, the proposed attention mechanism can automatically and implicitly learn and extract "meta paths" that are important for different downstream tasks.
To handle graph dynamics, we enhance HGT by proposing the relative temporal encoding (RTE) strategy. Instead of slicing the input graph into different timestamps, we propose to maintain all the edges happening in different times as a whole, and design the RTE strategy to model structural temporal dependencies with any duration length, and even with unseen and future timestamps. By end-to-end training, RTE enables HGT to automatically learn the temporal dependency and evolution of heterogeneous graphs.
To handle Web-scale graph data, we design the first heterogeneous sub-graph sampling algorithm--HGSampling--for minibatch GNN training. Its main idea is to sample heterogeneous subgraphs in which different types of nodes are with similar proportions, since the direct usage of existing (homogeneous) GNN sampling methods, such as GraphSage [7], FastGCN [1], and LADIES [29], results in highly imbalanced ones regarding to both node and edge types. In addition, it is also designed to keep the sampled sub-graphs dense for minimizing the loss of information. With HGSampling, all the GNN models, including our proposed HGT, can train and infer on arbitrary-size heterogeneous graphs.
We demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed Heterogeneous Graph Transformer on the Web-scale Open Academic Graph comprised of 179 million nodes and 2 billion edges spanning from 1900 to 2019, making this the largest-scale and longest-spanning representation learning yet performed on heterogeneous graphs. Additionally, we also examine it on domain-specific graphs: the computer science and medicine academic graphs. Experimental results suggest that HGT can significantly improve various downstream tasks over state-of-the-art GNNs as well as dedicated heterogeneous models by 9­21%. We further conduct case studies

to show the proposed method can indeed automatically capture the importance of implicit meta paths for different tasks.
2 PRELIMINARIES AND RELATED WORK
In this section, we introduce the basic definition of heterogeneous graphs with network dynamics and review the recent development on graph neural networks (GNNs) and their heterogeneous variants. We also highlight the difference between HGT and existing attempts on heterogeneous graph neural networks.
2.1 Heterogeneous Graph Mining
Heterogeneous graphs [17] (a.k.a., heterogeneous information networks) are an important abstraction for modeling relational data for many real-world complex systems. Formally, it is defined as:
Definition 1. Heterogeneous Graph: A heterogeneous graph is defined as a directed graph G = (V, E, A, R) where each node v  V and each edge e  E are associated with their type mapping functions  (v) : V  A and (e) : E  R, respectively.
Meta Relation. For an edge e = (s, t) linked from source node s to target node t, its meta relation is denoted as  (s), (e),  (t). Naturally, (e)-1 represents the inverse of (e). The classical meta path paradigm [17­19] is defined as a sequence of such meta relation.
Notice that, to better model real-world heterogeneous networks, we assume that there may exist multiple types of relations between different types of nodes. For example, in OAG there are different types of relations between the author and paper nodes by considering the authorship order, i.e., "the first author of", "the second author of", and so on.
Dynamic Heterogeneous Graph. To model the dynamic nature of real-world (heterogeneous) graphs, we assign an edge e = (s, t) a timestamp T , when node s connects to node t at T . If s appears for the first time, T is also assigned to s. s can be associated with multiple timestamps if it builds connections over time.
In other words, we assume that the timestamp of an edge is unchanged, denoting the time it is created. For example, when a paper published on a conference at time T , T will be assigned to the edge between the paper and conference nodes. On the contrary, different timestamps can be assigned to a node accordingly. For example, the conference node "WWW" can be assigned any year. WWW @1994 means that we are considering the first edition of WWW, which focuses more on internet protocol and Web infrastructure, while WWW @2020 means the upcoming WWW, which expands its research topics to social analysis, ubiquitous computing, search & IR, privacy and society, etc.
There have been significant lines of research on mining heterogenous graphs, such as node classification, clustering, ranking and representation learning [3, 17­19], while the dynamic perspective of HGs has not been extensively explored and studied.
2.2 Graph Neural Networks
Recent years have witnessed the success of graph neural networks for relational data [7, 9, 22]. Generally, a GNN can be regarded as using the input graph structure as the computation graph for

