arXiv:2006.09891v1 [cs.CL] 17 Jun 2020

Fine-grained Sentiment Controlled Text Generation
Bidisha Samanta, Mohit Agarwal, Niloy Ganguly
bidisha@iitkgp.ac.in, mohit2agrawal@gmail.com, niloy@cse.iitkgp.ac.in IIT Kharagpur
Abstract Controlled text generation techniques aim to regulate specific attributes (e.g. sentiment) while preserving the attribute independent content. The state-of-the-art approaches model the specified attribute as a structured or discrete representation while making the content representation independent of it to achieve a better control. However, disentangling the text representation into separate latent spaces overlooks complex dependencies between content and attribute, leading to generation of poorly constructed and not so meaningful sentences. Moreover, such an approach fails to provide a finer control on the degree of attribute change. To address these problems of controlled text generation, in this paper, we propose DE-VAE, a hierarchical framework which captures both information enriched entangled representation and attribute specific disentangled representation in different hierarchies. DE-VAE achieves better control of sentiment as an attribute while preserving the content by learning a suitable lossless transformation network from the disentangled sentiment space to the desired entangled representation. Through feature supervision on a single dimension of the disentangled representation, DE-VAE maps the variation of sentiment to a continuous space which helps in smoothly regulating sentiment from positive to negative and vice versa. Detailed experiments on three publicly available review datasets show the superiority of DE-VAE over recent state-of-the-art approaches.
1 Introduction
Text generation using variational inference [2] is beneficial as it captures important characteristics of the input word sequence in a continuous latent space. The obtained latent space text embedding is broadly used for performing several downstream tasks including machine translation [1], summarization [15], dialog generation [11], etc. In contrast to unconditional text generation, controlled text generative models aim to construct sentences with specified attributes such as sentiment, tense, or style. Existing state-of-the-art methods for controlled text generation have mainly focused on disentangling the attribute and content representation in the latent space and generate sentences from that by modifying the attribute representation. Such methods have either derived attribute and content representations separately using multiple attribute specific decoders [7, 10], or used an adversarial setup [9] to make the text representation independent of attribute information. Another line of work has focused only on style transfer which primarily involves flipping the style or attribute value of the given sentence. Several recent works [16, 18, 19, 26, 27, 28] have explored the use of adversarial discriminators for achieving such text style transfer through disentanglement. However, these methods do not explicitly model the process of fine tuning the attribute values, e.g., changing sentiment values from extreme positive to neutral to negative, while keeping the content same. Extension of these models for finer attribute control often fail in mainly two different aspects. They cannot regulate the attribute smoothly because of multidimensional or structured (one hot encoding) representation space of the attributes. The disentanglement of the latent space also overlooks the interdependency between attribute and content. As a result, just modifying the attribute part often leads to the generation of sentences not having sufficient content overlap with the original sentence.
Disentangling latent features (such as rotation and color) of images [3, 8] is a well explored area in computer vision. In particular, BetaVAE [8] has modified the Variational Autoencoder with a special emphasis on
1

KL in order to enforce disentanglement. Further, some other works like [12, 14] have tried to achieve a trade-off between disentanglement and reconstruction quality. Although these unsupervised approaches have shown promising results on image data, achieving disentanglement in the latent representation learned for text generation comes with obvious pitfalls. The difficulty of this task arises from the fact that the text representation based on recent state-of-the-art methods like BERT [4], Transformer [24], or Seq2seq [21] is a complex manifold of entangled salient features. These representations are highly expressive for several downstream tasks including high quality sentence generation that preserves the semantics. Hence, disentangling the enriched representation space into separate spaces for attribute and content results in neglecting the complex dependency between them, thereby compromising the quality of text generation. Thus, previous methods [9, 10, 16, 18, 19, 26, 27, 28] that have tried to achieve attribute control by disentangling the latent space used for text generation suffer from these aforementioned issues, i.e., generating poor and unrealistic sentences while trying to fine tune the attribute values. A recent work [25] has proposed attribute transfer using entangled representation that enables fine tuning of the sentiment polarity. However, it is restricted to modifying the sentiment of the given sentence to only its opposite polarity using costly Fast-Gradient-Iterative Modification. We aim to address these shortcomings of existing literature by proposing a trade-off between preserving entangled representation as a latent space to generate text for better reconstruction, and deriving a continuous attribute representation in a disentangled space on top of it to fine tune the attribute values.
In this paper, specifically, we propose the model Disentangled-Entangle-VAE (DE-VAE), a feature supervised framework that transforms entangled and enriched text representation obtained using BERT encoder to a higher level representation of sentiment as a specified attribute, along with other unspecified attributes using a transformation network. DE-VAE enforces disentanglement of the derived representation by imposing a factored prior which enables independence among different dimensions of the latent representation. Further, using attribute supervision on the intended dimension of this disentangled representation, we map the sentiment to a continuous space. For attribute guided text generation, DE-VAE converts the disentangled representation back to original entangled representation and generate sentence from that. This reverse transformation helps to preserve the complex relationships between sentiment and other inherent attributes in an enriched entangled space, thereby generating more meaningful and realistic sentences compared to competing methods. However, the choice of such transformation networks for transforming from disentangled to entangled space, and vice-versa is extremely important. The transformation needs to be lossless, otherwise the decoded entangled space can become different than that of the original text representation. We use the concept of invertible normalising flow [6, 13, 17] to enforce these transformations. By jointly optimizing the parameters of transformation network, along with imposing disentanglement constraint and feature supervision on the feature space, DE-VAE successfully learns how a disentangled space for sentiment and other unspecified attributes can be converted to a meaningful entangled representation space of the sentence.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of DE-VAE to generate controlled text by fine tuning sentiment. Using three large publicly available review datasets, we show that DE-VAE improves the performance significantly over previous controlled text generative models on three different criteria, namely, sentiment control accuracy, smooth fine tuning of sentiment in both directions, and content preservation. We show that even a small difference between the decoded entangled feature space and the original entangled space, introduced by using an alternative transformation network, can lead to a significant performance drop. Finally, through an ablation study, we demonstrate the disentanglement achieved by DE-VAE on the derived feature space.
2 DE-VAE : Text generation with fine tuned attributes
In this section, we first give a high level overview of DE-VAE, a hierarchical model for controlled text generation, starting with describing the data. Next, we describe the key technical aspects of its individual components with key contributions in detail. Finally, we illustrate the training procedure.
2

