WAFFLE: Weighted Averaging for Personalized Federated Learning

arXiv:2110.06978v2 [cs.LG] 13 Dec 2021

Martin Beaussart EPFL
martin.beaussart@epfl.ch
Mary-Anne Hartley EPFL
mary-anne.hartley@epfl.ch

Felix Grimberg EPFL
felix.grimberg@epfl.ch
Martin Jaggi EPFL
martin.jaggi@epfl.ch

Abstract
In federated learning, model personalization can be a very effective strategy to deal with heterogeneous training data across clients. We introduce WAFFLE (Weighted Averaging For Federated LEarning), a personalized collaborative machine learning algorithm that leverages stochastic control variates for faster convergence. WAFFLE uses the Euclidean distance between clients' updates to weigh their individual contributions and thus minimize the personalized model loss on the specific agent of interest. Through a series of experiments, we compare our new approach to two recent personalized federated learning methods--Weight Erosion and APFL--as well as two general FL methods--Federated Averaging and SCAFFOLD. Performance is evaluated using two categories of non-identical client data distributions-- concept shift and label skew--on two image data sets (MNIST and CIFAR10). Our experiments demonstrate the comparative effectiveness of WAFFLE, as it achieves or improves accuracy with faster convergence.
1 Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is a collaborative learning technique to build machine learning (ML) models from data distributed among several participants ("agents"). The objective is to generate a common, robust model not by exchanging the data between agents, but rather through exchanging parameter updates for the common model that all agents share at a certain frequency. This technique addresses some major problems of centralized data-sharing approaches, can enable data privacy and security and is therefore attractive to many applications with sensitive data.
We consider centralized FL, in which a single server orchestrates the execution of the algorithms. Each iteration of learning can thus be divided into four main steps. Firstly, the central server sends the current model to all agents. Secondly, each agent trains the model with their data and, thirdly, sends the updated model parameters back to the central server. Finally, the central server aggregates these results and generates a new global model. WAFFLE intervenes in this last step: instead of a global one-size-fits-all model, the aggregation produces a personalized model for each specific agent.
1.1 Control Variates for Heterogeneous Data
Federated learning develops a common model for all agents, typically under the assumption that data is independent and identically distributed (IID) across agents. In real-world applications, this assumption rarely holds, and thus the convergence rate and final performance of FL algorithms like Federated Averaging (FedAvg) can vary significantly [McMahan et al., 2017, Karimireddy et al.,
1st NeurIPS Workshop on New Frontiers in Federated Learning (NFFL 2021), Virtual Meeting.

2020]. Karimireddy et al. [2020] introduce SCAFFOLD, which uses stochastic control variates (SCV) to tackle the client-drift that results from non-IID-ness across agents. Each agent maintains an SCV estimating the sum of all other agents' gradients, and uses it to "correct" each step of stochastic gradient descent (SGD). Compared to FedAvg, SCAFFOLD converges faster and towards a better model. WAFFLE extends SCAFFOLD to collaboratively train a personalized ML model.
1.2 Model Personalization
A complementary solution for dealing with non-IID data is to train a unique (personalized) model for each agent, rather than a single global model. Recently, there have been several key works on personalization in federated learning, see e.g. Kulkarni et al. [2020] for an overview. Some methods of adapting global models for individual agents are summarized in Kairouz et al. [2019], such as local fine-tuning [Deng et al., 2020, Kairouz et al., 2019], multi-task learning [Smith et al., 2017], and model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) [Finn et al., 2017, Fallah et al., 2020].
The model personalization method most similar to WAFFLE is Weight Erosion (WE) [Grimberg et al., 2020]. It is conceptually related to local fine-tuning, which consists of training a common global model and subsequently personalizing it for each agent by performing a small number of SGD steps on the agent's local data (resulting in one model per agent) [Kairouz et al., 2019]. WE achieves a smoother and more differentiated transition from global to local training by using a weighted average of the agents' gradients to update the server model at each communication round. Thus, the server model after running WE once is personalized for one specific agent--called user or Alice.1 Like WE, WAFFLE uses aggregation weights derived from the Euclidean distance between gradients to update the global model, but it combines this approach with the use of SCVs (Section 1.1). These different approaches for transitioning from global to local training are illustrated in Figure 3 (Section 3).
Instead of interpolating between gradients at each round, a slightly different approach consists of interpolating between a local and global model [Grimberg et al., 2021, Donahue and Kleinberg, 2020, Deng et al., 2020, Zhang et al., 2021]. For instance, Deng et al. [2020] propose the adaptive FL algorithm APFL that achieves personalization by learning a global model and a set of local corrective models with which to interpolate. Another related approach is personalized MAML, where a global model is optimized with respect to (w.r.t.) the loss after local fine-tuning on each agent's local data [Finn et al., 2017, Fallah et al., 2020]. Finally, regularization can be used (instead of weighted averaging) to mix global and local training [Smith et al., 2017, Li et al., 2021]. For instance, Li et al. [2021] recently showed very promising results with Ditto, where the local model's training is split across all communication rounds and regularized by its distance from the current global model.
1.3 Benchmark
While several categories of non-IID data have been identified by Kairouz et al. [2019], we focus only on label skew and concept shift:
· Label skew: The distribution of labels varies between agents, but the "true" classification function is the same for all agents. This is, so far, the type of non-IID-ness most commonly used in personalized FL benchmarks [Li et al., 2021, Fallah et al., 2020, Deng et al., 2020].
· Concept shift: The mapping from the features to the label varies across agents. We include concept shift to model naturally partitioned data sets like those used by Smith et al. [2017].
1.4 Contributions
· We present a new personalized collaborative ML algorithm named WAFFLE (Weighted Averaging For Federated LEarning), which builds on the existing methods SCAFFOLD and Weight Erosion (WE) by using stochastic control (SC) and weighted gradient aggregation. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first method that uses SC in model personalization.
· We build an image classification benchmark with label skew and concept shift. We then use it to compare WAFFLE against baselines (Federated Averaging and Local), its parent
1The authors motivate this setting, in which all other agents contribute selflessly to Alice's objective, by constructing a fictive scenario of cross-silo FL across hospitals. Alternatively, for cross-silo FL, WE (or WAFFLE) can be run several times in parallel to obtain personalized models for all agents.
2

