Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

arXiv:1609.02907v4 [cs.LG] 22 Feb 2017

SEMI-SUPERVISED CLASSIFICATION WITH GRAPH CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORKS

Thomas N. Kipf University of Amsterdam T.N.Kipf@uva.nl

Max Welling University of Amsterdam Canadian Institute for Advanced Research (CIFAR) M.Welling@uva.nl

ABSTRACT
We present a scalable approach for semi-supervised learning on graph-structured data that is based on an efficient variant of convolutional neural networks which operate directly on graphs. We motivate the choice of our convolutional architecture via a localized first-order approximation of spectral graph convolutions. Our model scales linearly in the number of graph edges and learns hidden layer representations that encode both local graph structure and features of nodes. In a number of experiments on citation networks and on a knowledge graph dataset we demonstrate that our approach outperforms related methods by a significant margin.

1 INTRODUCTION

We consider the problem of classifying nodes (such as documents) in a graph (such as a citation network), where labels are only available for a small subset of nodes. This problem can be framed as graph-based semi-supervised learning, where label information is smoothed over the graph via some form of explicit graph-based regularization (Zhu et al., 2003; Zhou et al., 2004; Belkin et al., 2006; Weston et al., 2012), e.g. by using a graph Laplacian regularization term in the loss function:

L = L0 + Lreg , with Lreg = Aij f (Xi) - f (Xj) 2 = f (X) f (X) .

(1)

i,j

Here, L0 denotes the supervised loss w.r.t. the labeled part of the graph, f (·) can be a neural networklike differentiable function,  is a weighing factor and X is a matrix of node feature vectors Xi.  = D - A denotes the unnormalized graph Laplacian of an undirected graph G = (V, E) with N nodes vi  V, edges (vi, vj)  E, an adjacency matrix A  RN×N (binary or weighted) and a degree matrix Dii = j Aij. The formulation of Eq. 1 relies on the assumption that connected nodes in the graph are likely to share the same label. This assumption, however, might restrict modeling capacity, as graph edges need not necessarily encode node similarity, but could contain additional information.
In this work, we encode the graph structure directly using a neural network model f (X, A) and train on a supervised target L0 for all nodes with labels, thereby avoiding explicit graph-based regularization in the loss function. Conditioning f (·) on the adjacency matrix of the graph will allow the model to distribute gradient information from the supervised loss L0 and will enable it to learn representations of nodes both with and without labels.
Our contributions are two-fold. Firstly, we introduce a simple and well-behaved layer-wise propagation rule for neural network models which operate directly on graphs and show how it can be motivated from a first-order approximation of spectral graph convolutions (Hammond et al., 2011). Secondly, we demonstrate how this form of a graph-based neural network model can be used for fast and scalable semi-supervised classification of nodes in a graph. Experiments on a number of datasets demonstrate that our model compares favorably both in classification accuracy and efficiency (measured in wall-clock time) against state-of-the-art methods for semi-supervised learning.

1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2017

2 FAST APPROXIMATE CONVOLUTIONS ON GRAPHS

In this section, we provide theoretical motivation for a specific graph-based neural network model f (X, A) that we will use in the rest of this paper. We consider a multi-layer Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) with the following layer-wise propagation rule:

H(l+1) = 

D~ -

1 2

A~D~ -

1 2

H

(l)

W

(l)

.

(2)

Here, A~ = A + IN is the adjacency matrix of the undirected graph G with added self-connections. IN is the identity matrix, D~ii = j A~ij and W (l) is a layer-specific trainable weight matrix. (·) denotes an activation function, such as the ReLU(·) = max(0, ·). H(l)  RN×D is the matrix of activations in the lth layer; H(0) = X. In the following, we show that the form of this propagation rule can be motivated1 via a first-order approximation of localized spectral filters on graphs (Hammond
et al., 2011; Defferrard et al., 2016).

2.1 SPECTRAL GRAPH CONVOLUTIONS

We consider spectral convolutions on graphs defined as the multiplication of a signal x  RN (a scalar for every node) with a filter g = diag() parameterized by   RN in the Fourier domain,
i.e.:

g x = U gU x ,

(3)

where U

is the matrix of eigenvectors of the normalized graph Laplacian L

=

IN

-

D-

1 2

AD-

1 2

=

U U , with a diagonal matrix of its eigenvalues  and U x being the graph Fourier transform

of x. We can understand g as a function of the eigenvalues of L, i.e. g(). Evaluating Eq. 3 is computationally expensive, as multiplication with the eigenvector matrix U is O(N 2). Furthermore,

computing the eigendecomposition of L in the first place might be prohibitively expensive for large

graphs. To circumvent this problem, it was suggested in Hammond et al. (2011) that g() can be well-approximated by a truncated expansion in terms of Chebyshev polynomials Tk(x) up to Kth

order:

K

g ()  kTk(~ ) ,

(4)

k=0

with a rescaled ~ =

2 max



-

IN .

max denotes the largest eigenvalue of L.



 RK is now a

vector of Chebyshev coefficients. The Chebyshev polynomials are recursively defined as Tk(x) =

2xTk-1(x) - Tk-2(x), with T0(x) = 1 and T1(x) = x. The reader is referred to Hammond et al.

(2011) for an in-depth discussion of this approximation.

Going back to our definition of a convolution of a signal x with a filter g , we now have:

K

g x  kTk(L~)x ,

(5)

k=0

with

L~

=

2 max

L

-

IN

;

as can easily be verified

by noticing

that (U U

)k = U kU

. Note that

this expression is now K-localized since it is a Kth-order polynomial in the Laplacian, i.e. it depends

only on nodes that are at maximum K steps away from the central node (Kth-order neighborhood).

The complexity of evaluating Eq. 5 is O(|E|), i.e. linear in the number of edges. Defferrard et al.

(2016) use this K-localized convolution to define a convolutional neural network on graphs.

2.2 LAYER-WISE LINEAR MODEL
A neural network model based on graph convolutions can therefore be built by stacking multiple convolutional layers of the form of Eq. 5, each layer followed by a point-wise non-linearity. Now, imagine we limited the layer-wise convolution operation to K = 1 (see Eq. 5), i.e. a function that is linear w.r.t. L and therefore a linear function on the graph Laplacian spectrum.
1We provide an alternative interpretation of this propagation rule based on the Weisfeiler-Lehman algorithm (Weisfeiler & Lehmann, 1968) in Appendix A.

2

