KG-BERT: BERT for Knowledge Graph Completion
Liang Yao, Chengsheng Mao, Yuan Luo
Northwestern University Chicago IL 60611
{liang.yao, chengsheng.mao, yuan.luo}@northwestern.edu

arXiv:1909.03193v2 [cs.CL] 11 Sep 2019

Abstract
Knowledge graphs are important resources for many artificial intelligence tasks but often suffer from incompleteness. In this work, we propose to use pre-trained language models for knowledge graph completion. We treat triples in knowledge graphs as textual sequences and propose a novel framework named Knowledge Graph Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformer (KG-BERT) to model these triples. Our method takes entity and relation descriptions of a triple as input and computes scoring function of the triple with the KG-BERT language model. Experimental results on multiple benchmark knowledge graphs show that our method can achieve state-of-the-art performance in triple classification, link prediction and relation prediction tasks.
Introduction
Large-scale knowledge graphs (KG) such as FreeBase (Bollacker et al. 2008), YAGO (Suchanek, Kasneci, and Weikum 2007) and WordNet (Miller 1995) provide effective basis for many important AI tasks such as semantic search, recommendation (Zhang et al. 2016) and question answering (Cui et al. 2017). A KG is typically a multi-relational graph containing entities as nodes and relations as edges. Each edge is represented as a triplet (head entity, relation, tail entity) ((h, r, t) for short), indicating the relation between two entities, e.g., (Steve Jobs, founded, Apple Inc.). Despite their effectiveness, knowledge graphs are still far from being complete. This problem motivates the task of knowledge graph completion, which is targeted at assessing the plausibility of triples not present in a knowledge graph.
Much research work has been devoted to knowledge graph completion. A common approach is called knowledge graph embedding which represents entities and relations in triples as real-valued vectors and assess triples' plausibility with these vectors (Wang et al. 2017). However, most knowledge graph embedding models only use structure information in observed triple facts, which suffer from the sparseness of knowledge graphs. Some recent studies incorporate textual information to enrich knowledge repre-
Corresponding Author Copyright c 2020, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.

sentation (Socher et al. 2013; Xie et al. 2016; Xiao et al. 2017), but they learn unique text embedding for the same entity/relation in different triples, which ignore contextual information. For instance, different words in the description of Steve Jobs should have distinct importance weights connected to two relations "founded" and "isCitizenOf", the relation "wroteMusicFor" can have two different meanings "writes lyrics" and "composes musical compositions" given different entities. On the other hand, syntactic and semantic information in large-scale text data is not fully utilized, as they only employ entity descriptions, relation mentions or word co-occurrence with entities (Wang and Li 2016; Xu et al. 2017; An et al. 2018).
Recently, pre-trained language models such as ELMo (Peters et al. 2018), GPT (Radford et al. 2018), BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) and XLNet (Yang et al. 2019) have shown great success in natural language processing (NLP), these models can learn contextualized word embeddings with large amount of free text data and achieve state-of-the-art performance in many language understanding tasks. Among them, BERT is the most prominent one by pre-training the bidirectional Transformer encoder through masked language modeling and next sentence prediction. It can capture rich linguistic knowledge in pre-trained model weights.
In this study, we propose a novel method for knowledge graph completion using pre-trained language models. Specifically, we first treat entities, relations and triples as textual sequences and turn knowledge graph completion into a sequence classification problem. We then fine-tune BERT model on these sequences for predicting the plausibility of a triple or a relation. The method can achieve strong performance in several KG completion tasks. Our source code is available at https://github.com/yao8839836/kg-bert. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
· We propose a new language modeling method for knowledge graph completion. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to model triples' plausibility with a pretrained contextual language model.
· Results on several benchmark datasets show that our method can achieve state-of-the-art results in triple classification, relation prediction and link prediction tasks.

Related Work
Knowledge Graph Embedding
A literature survey of knowledge graph embedding methods has been conducted by (Wang et al. 2017). These methods can be classified into translational distance models and semantic matching models based on different scoring functions for a triple (h, r, t). Translational distance models use distance-based scoring functions. They assess the plausibility of a triple (h, r, t) by the distance between the two entity vectors h and t, typically after a translation performed by the relation vector r. The representative models are TransE (Bordes et al. 2013) and its extensions including TransH (Wang et al. 2014b). For TransE, the scoring function is defined as the negative translational distance f (h, r, t) = -||h + r - t||. Semantic matching models employ similarity-based scoring functions. The representative models are RESCAL (Nickel, Tresp, and Kriegel 2011), DistMult (Yang et al. 2015) and their extensions. For DistMult, the scoring function is defined as a bilinear function f (h, r, t) = h, r, t . Recently, convolutional neural networks also show promising results for knowledge graph completion (Dettmers et al. 2018; Nguyen et al. 2018a; Schlichtkrull et al. 2018).
The above methods conduct knowledge graph completion using only structural information observed in triples, while different kinds of external information like entity types, logical rules and textual descriptions can be introduced to improve the performance (Wang et al. 2017). For textual descriptions, (Socher et al. 2013) firstly represented entities by averaging the word embeddings contained in their names, where the word embeddings are learned from an external corpus. (Wang et al. 2014a) proposed to jointly embed entities and words into the same vector space by aligning Wikipedia anchors and entity names. (Xie et al. 2016) use convolutional neural networks (CNN) to encode word sequences in entity descriptions. (Xiao et al. 2017) proposed semantic space projection (SSP) which jointly learns topics and KG embeddings by characterizing the strong correlations between fact triples and textual descriptions. Despite their success, these models learn the same textual representations of entities and relations while words in entity/relation descriptions can have different meanings or importance weights in different triples.
To address the above problems, (Wang and Li 2016) presented a text-enhanced KG embedding model TEKE which can assign different embeddings to a relation in different triples. TEKE utilizes co-occurrences of entities and words in an entity-annotated text corpus. (Xu et al. 2017) used an LSTM encoder with attention mechanism to construct contextual text representations given different relations. (An et al. 2018) proposed an accurate text-enhanced KG embedding method by exploiting triple specific relation mentions and a mutual attention mechanism between relation mention and entity description. Although these methods can handle the semantic variety of entities and relations in distinct triples, they could not make full use of syntactic and semantic information in large scale free text data, as only entity descriptions, relation mentions and word co-occurrence

with entities are utilized. Compared with these methods, our method can learn context-aware text embeddings with rich language information via pre-trained language models.
Language Model Pre-training
Pre-trained language representation models can be divided into two categories: feature-based and fine tuning approaches. Traditional word embedding methods such as Word2Vec (Mikolov et al. 2013) and Glove (Pennington, Socher, and Manning 2014) aimed at adopting feature-based approaches to learn context-independent words vectors. ELMo (Peters et al. 2018) generalized traditional word embeddings to context-aware word embeddings, where word polysemy can be properly handled. Different from featurebased approaches, fine tuning approaches like GPT (Radford et al. 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) used the pre-trained model architecture and parameters as a starting point for specific NLP tasks. The pre-trained models capture rich semantic patterns from free text. Recently, pre-trained language models have also been explored in the context of KG. (Wang, Kulkarni, and Wang 2018) learned contextual embeddings on entity-relation chains (sentences) generated from random walks in KG, then used the embeddings as initialization of KG embeddings models like TransE. (Zhang et al. 2019) incorporated informative entities in KG to enhance BERT language representation. (Bosselut et al. 2019) used GPT to generate tail phrase tokens given head phrases and relation types in a common sense knowledge base which does not cleanly fit into a schema comparing two entities with a known relation. The method focuses on generating new entities and relations. Unlike these studies, we use names or descriptions of entities and relations as input and fine-tune BERT to compute plausibility scores of triples.
Method
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT)
BERT (Devlin et al. 2019) is a state-of-the-art pre-trained contextual language representation model built on a multilayer bidirectional Transformer encoder (Vaswani et al. 2017). The Transformer encoder is based on self-attention mechanism. There are two steps in BERT framework: pre-training and fine-tuning. During pre-training, BERT is trained on large-scale unlabeled general domain corpus (3,300M words from BooksCorpus and English Wikipedia) over two self-supervised tasks: masked language modeling and next sentence prediction. In masked language modeling, BERT predicts randomly masked input tokens. In next sentence prediction, BERT predicts whether two input sentences are consecutive. For fine-tuning, BERT is initialized with the pre-trained parameter weights, and all of the parameters are fine-tuned using labeled data from downstream tasks such as sentence pair classification, question answering and sequence labeling.
Knowledge Graph BERT (KG-BERT)
To take full advantage of contextual representation with rich language patterns, We fine tune pre-trained BERT for

