Principal Neighbourhood Aggregation for Graph Nets

arXiv:2004.05718v5 [cs.LG] 31 Dec 2020

Gabriele Corso University of Cambridge
gc579@cam.ac.uk

Luca Cavalleri University of Cambridge
lc737@cam.ac.uk

Dominique Beaini InVivo AI
dominique@invivoai.com

Pietro Liò University of Cambridge pietro.lio@cst.cam.ac.uk

Petar Velickovic´ DeepMind
petarv@google.com

Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been shown to be effective models for different predictive tasks on graph-structured data. Recent work on their expressive power has focused on isomorphism tasks and countable feature spaces. We extend this theoretical framework to include continuous features--which occur regularly in real-world input domains and within the hidden layers of GNNs--and we demonstrate the requirement for multiple aggregation functions in this context. Accordingly, we propose Principal Neighbourhood Aggregation (PNA), a novel architecture combining multiple aggregators with degree-scalers (which generalize the sum aggregator). Finally, we compare the capacity of different models to capture and exploit the graph structure via a novel benchmark containing multiple tasks taken from classical graph theory, alongside existing benchmarks from realworld domains, all of which demonstrate the strength of our model. With this work, we hope to steer some of the GNN research towards new aggregation methods which we believe are essential in the search for powerful and robust models.
1 Introduction
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have been an active research field for the last ten years with significant advancements in graph representation learning [1, 2, 3, 4]. However, it is difficult to understand the effectiveness of new GNNs due to the lack of standardized benchmarks [5] and of theoretical frameworks for their expressive power.
In fact, most work in this domain has focused on improving the GNN architectures on a set of graph benchmarks, without evaluating the capacity of their network to accurately characterize the graphs' structural properties. Only recently there have been significant studies on the expressive power of various GNN models [6, 7, 8, 9, 10]. However, these have mainly focused on the isomorphism task in domains with countable features spaces, and little work has been done on understanding their capacity to capture and exploit the underlying properties of the graph structure.
We hypothesize that the aggregation layers of current GNNs are unable to extract enough information from the nodes' neighbourhoods in a single layer, which limits their expressive power and learning abilities.
We first mathematically prove the need for multiple aggregators and propose a solution for the uncountable multiset injectivity problem introduced by [6]. Then, we propose the concept of degreescalers as a generalization to the sum aggregation, which allow the network to amplify or attenuate signals based on the degree of each node. Combining the above, we design the proposed Principal
Equal contribution.
34th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2020), Vancouver, Canada.

Neighbourhood Aggregation (PNA) model and demonstrate empirically that multiple aggregation strategies improve the performance of the GNN.
Dehmamy et al. [11] have also empirically found that using multiple aggregators (mean, sum and normalized mean), which extract similar statistics from the input message, improves the performance of GNNs on the task of graph moments. In contrast, our work extends the theoretical framework by deriving the necessity to use complementary aggregators. Accordingly, we propose the use of different statistical aggregations to allow each node to better understand the distribution of the messages it receives, and we generalize the mean as the first of a set of possible n-moment aggregators. In the setting of graph kernels, Cai et al. [12] constructed a simple baseline using multiple aggregators. In the field of computer vision, Lee et al. [13] empirically showed the benefits of combining mean and max pooling. These give us further confidence in the validity of our theoretical analysis.
We present a consistently well-performing and parameter efficient encode-process-decode architecture [14] for GNNs. This differs from traditional GNNs by allowing a variable number of convolutions with shared parameters. Using this model, we compare the performances of some of the most diffused models in the literature (GCN [15], GAT [16], GIN [6] and MPNN [17]) with our PNA.
Previous work on tasks taken from classical graph theory focuses on evaluating the performance of GNN models on a single task such as shortest paths [18, 19, 20], graph moments [11] or travelling salesman problem [5, 21]. Instead, we took a different approach by developing a multi-task benchmark containing problems both on the node level and the graph level. Many of the tasks are based on dynamic programming algorithms and are, therefore, expected to be well suited for GNNs [19]. We believe this multi-task approach ensures that the GNNs are able to understand multiple properties simultaneously, which is fundamental for solving complex graph problems. Moreover, efficiently sharing parameters between the tasks suggests a deeper understanding of the structural features of the graphs. Furthermore, we explore the generalization ability of the networks by testing on graphs of larger sizes than those present in the training set.
To further demonstrate the performance of our model, we also run tests on recently proposed realworld GNN benchmark datasets [5, 22] with tasks taken from molecular chemistry and computer vision. Results show the PNA outperforms the other models in the literature in most of the tasks hence further supporting our theoretical findings.
The code for all the aggregators, scalers, models (in PyTorch, DGL and PyTorch Geometric frameworks), architectures, multi-task dataset generation and real-world benchmarks is available here.
2 Principal Neighbourhood Aggregation
In this section, we first explain the motivation behind using multiple aggregators concurrently. We then present the idea of degree-based scalers, linking to prior related work on GNN expressiveness. Finally, we detail the design of graph convolutional layers which leverage the proposed Principal Neighbourhood Aggregation.
2.1 Proposed aggregators
Most work in the literature uses only a single aggregation method, with mean, sum and max aggregators being the most used in the state-of-the-art models [6, 15, 17, 18]. In Figure 1, we observe how different aggregators fail to discriminate between different messages when using a single GNN layer.
We formalize our observations in the theorem below:
Theorem 1 (Number of aggregators needed). In order to discriminate between multisets of size n whose underlying set is R, at least n aggregators are needed. Proposition 1 (Moments of the multiset). The moments of a multiset (as defined in Equation 4) exhibit a valid example using n aggregators.
We prove Theorem 1 in Appendix A and Proposition 1 in Appendix B. Note that unlike Xu et al. [6], we consider a continuous input feature space; this better represents many real-world tasks where the observed values have uncertainty, and better models the latent node features within a neural network's representations. Continuous features make the space uncountable, and void the injectivity proof of the sum aggregation presented by Xu et al. [6].
2

