arXiv:2006.04131v2 [cs.LG] 13 Jul 2020

Deep Graph Contrastive Representation Learning
Yanqiao Zhu1,2 Yichen Xu3, Feng Yu1,2 Qiang Liu4,5 Shu Wu1,2 Liang Wang1,2 1 Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2 School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
4 RealAI 5 Tsinghua University yanqiao.zhu@cripac.ia.ac.cn, linyxus@bupt.edu.cn {feng.yu, shu.wu, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, qiang.liu@realai.ai
Abstract
Graph representation learning nowadays becomes fundamental in analyzing graphstructured data. Inspired by recent success of contrastive methods, in this paper, we propose a novel framework for unsupervised graph representation learning by leveraging a contrastive objective at the node level. Specifically, we generate two graph views by corruption and learn node representations by maximizing the agreement of node representations in these two views. To provide diverse node contexts for the contrastive objective, we propose a hybrid scheme for generating graph views on both structure and attribute levels. Besides, we provide theoretical justification behind our motivation from two perspectives, mutual information and the classical triplet loss. We perform empirical experiments on both transductive and inductive learning tasks using a variety of real-world datasets. Experimental experiments demonstrate that despite its simplicity, our proposed method consistently outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods by large margins. Moreover, our unsupervised method even surpasses its supervised counterparts on transductive tasks, demonstrating its great potential in real-world applications.
1 Introduction
Over the past few years, graph representation learning has emerged as a powerful strategy for analyzing graph-structured data. Graph representation learning aims to learn an encoding function that transforms nodes to low-dimensional dense embeddings that preserve graph attributive and structural features. Traditional unsupervised graph representation learning approaches, such as DeepWalk [1] and node2vec [2], follow a contrastive framework originated in the skip-gram model [3]. Specifically, they first sample short random walks and then enforce neighboring nodes on the same walk to share similar embeddings by contrasting them with other nodes. However, DeepWalkbased methods can be seen as reconstructing the graph proximity matrix, such as high-order adjacent matrix [4], which excessively emphasize proximity information defined on the network structure [5].
Recently, graph representation learning using Graph Neural Networks (GNN) has received considerable attention. Along with its prosperous development, however, there is an increasing concern over the label availability when training the model. Nevertheless, existing GNN models are mostly established in a supervised manner [6­8], which require abundant labeled nodes for training. Albeit with some attempts connecting previous unsupervised objectives (i.e., matrix reconstruction) to GNN models [9, 10], these methods still heavily rely on the preset graph proximity matrix.
The first two authors contributed equally to this work. This work is done during his internship at CRIPAC, CASIA.
Preprint. Under review.

Anchor
Original features Corrupted features Positive pairs Negative pairs (intra-view) Negative pairs (inter-view)
Figure 1: Our proposed deep GRAph Contrastive rEpresentation learning (GRACE) model.
Instead of optimizing the reconstruction objective, visual representation learning leads to revitalization of the classical information maximization (InfoMax) principle [11]. A series of contrastive learning methods have been proposed so far [12­17], which seek to maximize the Mutual Information (MI) between the input (i.e., images) and its representations (i.e., image embeddings) by contrasting positive pairs with negative-sampled counterparts. Inspired by previous success of the Deep InfoMax (DIM) method [15] in visual representation learning, Deep Graph InfoMax (DGI) [18] proposes an alternative objective based on MI maximization in the graph domain. DGI firstly employs GNN to learn node embeddings and obtains a global summary embedding (i.e., the graph embedding), via a readout function. The objective used in DGI is then to maximize the MI between node embeddings and the graph embedding by discriminating nodes in the original graph from nodes in a corrupted graph.
However, we argue that the local-global MI maximization framework in DGI is still in its infancy. Its objective is proved to be equivalent to maximizing the MI between input node features and high-level node embeddings under some conditions. Specifically, to implement the InfoMax objective, DGI requires an injective readout function to produce the global graph embedding, where the injective property is too restrictive to fulfill. For the mean-pooling readout function employed in DGI, it is not guaranteed that the graph embedding can distill useful information from nodes, as it is insufficient to preserve distinctive features from node-level embeddings. Moreover, DGI proposes to use feature shuffling to generate corrupted views of graphs. Nevertheless, this scheme considers corrupting node features at a coarse-grained level when generating negative node samples. When the feature matrix is sparse, performing feature shuffling only is insufficient to generate different neighborhoods (i.e., contexts) for nodes in the corrupted graph, leading to difficulty in learning of the contrastive objective.
In this paper, we introduce a simple yet powerful contrastive framework for unsupervised graph representation learning (Figure 1), which we refer to as deep GRAph Contrastive rEpresentation learning (GRACE)3, motivated by a traditional self-organizing network [19] and its recent renaissance in visual representation learning [17]. Rather than contrasting node-level embeddings to global ones, we primarily focus on contrasting embeddings at the node level and our work makes no assumptions on injective readout functions for generating the graph embedding. In GRACE, we first generate two correlated graph views by randomly performing corruption. Then, we train the model using a contrastive loss to maximize the agreement between node embeddings in these two views. Unlike visual data, where abundant image transformation techniques are available, how to perform corruption to generate views for graphs is still an open problem. In our work, we jointly consider corruption at both topology and node attribute levels, namely removing edges and masking features, to provide diverse contexts for nodes in different views, so as to boost optimization of the contrastive objective. Last, we provide theoretical analysis that reveals the connections from our contrastive objective to mutual information and the classical triplet loss.
Our contribution is summarized as follows. Firstly, we propose a general contrastive framework for unsupervised graph representation learning. The proposed GRACE framework simplifies previous work and works by maximizing the agreement of node embeddings between two graph views. Secondly, we propose two specific schemes, removing edges and masking features, to generate views of graphs. Finally, we conduct comprehensive empirical studies using six popular public benchmark datasets on both transductive and inductive node classification under the commonly-used
3Code is made publicly available at https://github.com/CRIPAC-DIG/GRACE.
2

