arXiv:2106.05234v5 [cs.LG] 24 Nov 2021

Do Transformers Really Perform Bad for Graph Representation?
Chengxuan Ying1, Tianle Cai2, Shengjie Luo3, Shuxin Zheng4, Guolin Ke4, Di He4, Yanming Shen1, Tie-Yan Liu4
1Dalian University of Technology 2Princeton University 3Peking University 4Microsoft Research Asia
yingchengsyuan@gmail.com, tianle.cai@princeton.edu, luosj@stu.pku.edu.cn {shuz, guoke, dihe, tyliu}@microsoft.com, shen@dlut.edu.cn
Abstract
The Transformer architecture has become a dominant choice in many domains, such as natural language processing and computer vision. Yet, it has not achieved competitive performance on popular leaderboards of graph-level prediction compared to mainstream GNN variants. Therefore, it remains a mystery how Transformers could perform well for graph representation learning. In this paper, we solve this mystery by presenting Graphormer, which is built upon the standard Transformer architecture, and could attain excellent results on a broad range of graph representation learning tasks, especially on the recent OGB Large-Scale Challenge. Our key insight to utilizing Transformer in the graph is the necessity of effectively encoding the structural information of a graph into the model. To this end, we propose several simple yet effective structural encoding methods to help Graphormer better model graph-structured data. Besides, we mathematically characterize the expressive power of Graphormer and exhibit that with our ways of encoding the structural information of graphs, many popular GNN variants could be covered as the special cases of Graphormer. The code and models of Graphormer will be made publicly available at https://github.com/Microsoft/Graphormer.
1 Introduction
The Transformer [49] is well acknowledged as the most powerful neural network in modelling sequential data, such as natural language [11, 35, 6] and speech [17]. Model variants built upon Transformer have also been shown great performance in computer vision [12, 36] and programming language [19, 63, 44]. However, to the best of our knowledge, Transformer has still not been the de-facto standard on public graph representation leaderboards [22, 14, 21]. There are many attempts of leveraging Transformer into the graph domain, but the only effective way is replacing some key modules (e.g., feature aggregation) in classic GNN variants by the softmax attention [50, 7, 23, 51, 61, 46, 13]. Therefore, it is still an open question whether Transformer architecture is suitable to model graphs and how to make it work in graph representation learning.
In this paper, we give an affirmative answer by developing Graphormer, which is directly built upon the standard Transformer, and achieves state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of graphlevel prediction tasks, including the very recent Open Graph Benchmark Large-Scale Challenge (OGB-LSC) [21], and several popular leaderboards (e.g., OGB [22], Benchmarking-GNN [14]). The Transformer is originally designed for sequence modeling. To utilize its power in graphs, we believe
Interns at MSRA. Corresponding authors.
35th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2021), Sydney, Australia.

the key is to properly incorporate structural information of graphs into the model. Note that for each node i, the self-attention only calculates the semantic similarity between i and other nodes, without considering the structural information of a graph reflected on the nodes and the relation between node pairs. Graphormer incorporates several effective structural encoding methods to leverage such information, which are described below.
First, we propose a Centrality Encoding in Graphormer to capture the node importance in the graph. In a graph, different nodes may have different importance, e.g., celebrities are considered to be more influential than the majority of web users in a social network. However, such information isn't reflected in the self-attention module as it calculates the similarities mainly using the node semantic features. To address the problem, we propose to encode the node centrality in Graphormer. In particular, we leverage the degree centrality for the centrality encoding, where a learnable vector is assigned to each node according to its degree and added to the node features in the input layer. Empirical studies show that simple centrality encoding is effective for Transformer in modeling the graph data.
Second, we propose a novel Spatial Encoding in Graphormer to capture the structural relation between nodes. One notable geometrical property that distinguishes graph-structured data from other structured data, e.g., language, images, is that there does not exist a canonical grid to embed the graph. In fact, nodes can only lie in a non-Euclidean space and are linked by edges. To model such structural information, for each node pair, we assign a learnable embedding based on their spatial relation. Multiple measurements in the literature could be leveraged for modeling spatial relations. For a general purpose, we use the distance of the shortest path between any two nodes as a demonstration, which will be encoded as a bias term in the softmax attention and help the model accurately capture the spatial dependency in a graph. In addition, sometimes there is additional spatial information contained in edge features, such as the type of bond between two atoms in a molecular graph. We design a new edge encoding method to further take such signal into the Transformer layers. To be concrete, for each node pair, we compute an average of dot-products of the edge features and learnable embeddings along the shortest path, then use it in the attention module. Equipped with these encodings, Graphormer could better model the relationship for node pairs and represent the graph.
By using the proposed encodings above, we further mathematically show that Graphormer has strong expressiveness as many popular GNN variants are just its special cases. The great capacity of the model leads to state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of tasks in practice. On the large-scale quantum chemistry regression dataset3 in the very recent Open Graph Benchmark Large-Scale Challenge (OGB-LSC) [21], Graphormer outperforms most mainstream GNN variants by more than 10% points in terms of the relative error. On other popular leaderboards of graph representation learning (e.g., MolHIV, MolPCBA, ZINC) [22, 14], Graphormer also surpasses the previous best results, demonstrating the potential and adaptability of the Transformer architecture.
2 Preliminary
In this section, we recap the preliminaries in Graph Neural Networks and Transformer.
Graph Neural Network (GNN). Let G = (V, E) denote a graph where V = {v1, v2, · · · , vn}, n = |V | is the number of nodes. Let the feature vector of node vi be xi. GNNs aim to learn representation of nodes and graphs. Typically, modern GNNs follow a learning schema that iteratively updates the representation of a node by aggregating representations of its first or higher-order neighbors. We denote h(il) as the representation of vi at the l-th layer and define h(i0) = xi. The l-th iteration of aggregation could be characterized by AGGREGATE-COMBINE step as
ai(l) = AGGREGATE (l) h(jl-1) : j  N (vi) , hi(l) = COMBINE (l) hi(l-1), a(il) , (1)
where N (vi) is the set of first or higher-order neighbors of vi. The AGGREGATE function is used to gather the information from neighbors. Common aggregation functions include MEAN, MAX, SUM, which are used in different architectures of GNNs [26, 18, 50, 54]. The goal of COMBINE function is to fuse the information from neighbors into the node representation.
3https://ogb.stanford.edu/kddcup2021/pcqm4m/
2

