Training Graph Neural Networks with 1000 Layers

arXiv:2106.07476v3 [cs.LG] 11 Apr 2022 Score (ROC-AUC)  11GB 32GB

Guohao Li 1 2 Matthias Mu¨ ller 1 Bernard Ghanem 2 Vladlen Koltun 1

Abstract
Deep graph neural networks (GNNs) have achieved excellent results on various tasks on increasingly large graph datasets with millions of nodes and edges. However, memory complexity has become a major obstacle when training deep GNNs for practical applications due to the immense number of nodes, edges, and intermediate activations. To improve the scalability of GNNs, prior works propose smart graph sampling or partitioning strategies to train GNNs with a smaller set of nodes or sub-graphs. In this work, we study reversible connections, group convolutions, weight tying, and equilibrium models to advance the memory and parameter efficiency of GNNs. We find that reversible connections in combination with deep network architectures enable the training of overparameterized GNNs that significantly outperform existing methods on multiple datasets. Our models RevGNN-Deep (1001 layers with 80 channels each) and RevGNN-Wide (448 layers with 224 channels each) were both trained on a single commodity GPU and achieve an ROC-AUC of 87.74 ± 0.13 and 88.24 ± 0.15 on the ogbn-proteins dataset. To the best of our knowledge, RevGNN-Deep is the deepest GNN in the literature by one order of magnitude.
1. Introduction
Graphs are all around us. Whether we watch a show on Netflix, browse through friends' feeds on Facebook, buy something on Amazon, or look up a researcher on Google, chances are that our actions trigger queries on a large graph. Movie and book databases are often encoded as knowledge graphs for efficient recommendation systems. Social media services rely on social graphs. Shopping platforms leverage product co-purchasing networks to boost sales. Citation indices like Web of Science, Scopus, and Google Scholar
1Intel Labs 2King Abdullah University of Science and Technology. Correspondence to: Guohao Li <guohao.li@kaust.edu.sa>.
Proceedings of the 38 th International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR 139, 2021. Copyright 2021 by the author(s).

RevGNN-Wide
88
RevGNN-Deep RevGNN-224
87

86

RevGNN-80 DEQ-GNN-224

RevGNN-64 WT-RevGNN-224

85

ResGNN-224

ResGNN-64

Out of Memory

WT-ResGNN-224 Out of Memory

84

WT-RevGNN-80

83

DEQ-GNN-64 WT-RevGNN-64

0

5

10

WT-ResGNN-64

15

20

25

30

 GPU Memory (GB)

35 90

95 100

Figure 1. ROC-AUC score vs. GPU memory consumption on

the ogbn-proteins dataset. We find that deep reversible GNNs

are very powerful and outperform existing models by a margin;

our best models are RevGNN-Deep and RevGNN-Wide. We also

compare reversible connections (RevGNN-x), weight-tying (WT-

x), and equilibrium models (DEQ-x) for 112-layer deep GNNs

(x denotes the number of channels per layer). Reversible models

consistently achieve the same or better performance as the baseline

using only a fraction of the memory. Weight-tied and equilibrium

Dmaotdaeplos ionftfesrizaegiosopdropperofrotriomnaanlcteotoppa,rawmheetreer

efficiency trade-off. p is the number of

parameters.

construct large citation graphs. Even the Internet itself is in essence a vast graph with billions of nodes and edges. Graphs are also powerful tools for representing 3D data such as point clouds and meshes or biological data such as molecular structures and protein interactions.
One prominent and powerful approach to process such graphs are graph neural networks (GNNs). GNNs have achieved impressive performance on relatively small graph datasets (Yang et al., 2016; Zitnik & Leskovec, 2017; Shchur et al., 2018). Unfortunately, the most interesting and impactful real-world problems rely on very large graphs where limited GPU memory quickly becomes a bottleneck. In order to train GNN models on large graphs, the common practice is to reduce the number of model parameters. This is counterproductive, since processing larger graphs would likely benefit from more parameters. While there is evidence that over-parameterized models generalize better (Neyshabur et al., 2019; Belkin et al., 2019), the relationship between performance and parameters is best illustrated in the context

Training Graph Neural Networks with 1000 Layers

of language modelling. Recent progress in natural language processing (NLP) has been enabled by a massive increase in parameter counts: GPT (110M) (Radford et al.), BERT (340M) (Devlin et al., 2019), GPT-3 (175B) (Brown et al., 2020), Gshard-M4 (600B) (Lepikhin et al., 2021), and DeepSpeed (1T) (Rasley et al., 2020). More parameters mean deeper or wider networks that consume more memory.
GNNs have shown a lot of promise on recent large-scale graph datasets such as Benchmarking GNNs (Dwivedi et al., 2020), Open Graph Benchmark (OGB) (Hu et al., 2020; 2021) and Microsoft Academic Graph (MAG) (Wang et al., 2020). Recent works (Li et al., 2019; 2020; Chen et al., 2020) have successfully trained deep models with a large number of parameters and achieved state-of-the-art performance. However, these models have large memory footprints and operate at the physical limits of current hardware. In order to apply deeper and wider GNNs with more parameters, we need either different hardware or more efficient architectures that consume less memory.
Existing works try to overcome the memory bottleneck by mini-batch training, i.e. sampling a smaller set of nodes (Hamilton et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018b;a) or partitioning large graphs (Chiang et al., 2019; Zeng et al., 2020) into smaller subgraphs and sampling from those. These approaches have proven successful, but they introduce further hyperparameters that need to be tuned. For instance, if the sampled size of nodes or subgraphs is too small, it may break important structures in the graph. While these methods are a step in the right direction, they do not scale well as the models become deeper or wider, since memory consumption is still dependent on the number of layers. Another approach is efficient propagation via K-power adjacency matrices or graph diffusion matrices (Wu et al., 2019; Klicpera et al., 2019; Bojchevski et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2020; Frasca et al., 2020). However, the propagation schemes of these methods are non-trainable, which may lead to sub-optimality.
Inspired by efficient architectures from computer vision and natural language processing (Gomez et al., 2017; Xie et al., 2017; Bai et al., 2018; 2019), here we investigate several methods to obtain more efficient GNNs that use less memory than conventional architectures while achieving state-of-theart results (see Figure 1). We explore grouped reversible graph connections in order to reduce the memory complexity with respect to the number of layers from O(L) to O(1). In other words, the memory consumption is independent of the depth. This allows us to train very deep, over-parameterized models with constant memory consumption.
We also investigate parameter-efficient architectures. We study deep weight-tied GNNs that have the parameter cost of only a single layer. We also develop a deep graph equilibrium GNN, which is essentially a weight-tied network with infinite depth. We directly solve for the equilibrium point of

this infinite-layer network using a root-finding method. We backpropagate through the equilibrium point using implicit differentiation. Hence, we do not need to store intermediate states and get an infinite-depth network at the memory and parameter cost of a single layer.
Our analysis of these methods shows that deep reversible architectures are the most powerful in terms of achieving state-of-the-art performance on benchmark datasets. This is due to their very large capacity at low memory cost and only slightly increased training time. Weight-tied models offer constant parameter size regardless of depth. However, due to the smaller number of parameters, performance on large datasets suffers and has to be compensated by increasing the width. Finally, graph equilibrium models have the same memory efficiency as reversible models and the same parameter efficiency as weight-tied models. They perform similarly to weight-tied models, and the training time vs. performance tradeoff can be further adjusted by tuning the number of iterations in each optimization step.
Our methods can be applied to different GNN operators. In our experiments, we successfully apply them to GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017), GAT (Velickovic´ et al., 2018), and DeepGCN (Li et al., 2019). We can also combine the proposed techniques with samplingbased methods to further reduce memory and boost performance on some datasets. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to train a GNN with more than 1000 layers. Our model RevGNN-Deep, outperforms all state-of-the-art approaches on the ogbn-proteins dataset (Hu et al., 2020) with an ROC-AUC of 87.74%, while only consuming 2.86 GB of GPU memory during training, one order of magnitude less than the current top performer. We can also trade our memory savings for larger width, pushing performance to new heights. Our RevGNN-Wide achieves an ROC-AUC of 88.24% on the ogbn-proteins dataset, ranking first on the leaderboard by a large margin.
In summary, we investigate several techniques to increase the memory efficiency of GNNs and perform an extensive analysis. We significantly outperform current state-of-theart methods on several datasets by employing reversible connections to train deeper and wider models. Further, we demonstrate the generality of these techniques by applying them to multiple GNN operators. We release our implementation, which supports PyTorch Geometric (Fey & Lenssen, 2019) and the Deep Graph Library (Wang et al., 2019a).
2. Related Work
GNNs were introduced by Gori et al. (2005) and Scarselli et al. (2008) for learning a graph representation by finding stable states through fixed-point iterations. Bruna et al. (2014) generalized Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)

