Author version, Published version : doi.org/10.5771/9783956506611-69 Please cite as: Slavic, A., Siebes, R., & Scharnhorst, A. (2021). Publishing a Knowledge Organization System as Linked Data. The Case of the Universal Decimal Classification (Chapter 5). In R. P. Smiraglia & A. Scharnhorst (Eds.), Linking Knowledge. Ergon ­ Nomos. Pp. 69-98, https://doi.org/10.5771/9783956506611-69
Aida Slavic UDC Consortium
Ronald Siebes Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam
Andrea Scharnhorst Data Archiving and Networked Services (KNAW)
Chapter 5 Publishing a Knowledge Organization System as Linked Data
The Case of the Universal Decimal Classification
Abstract
Linked data (LD) technology is hailed as a long-awaited solution in web-based information exchange. Linked Open Data (LOD) bring this to another level by enabling meaningful linking of resources and creating a global, openly accessible knowledge graph. Our case is the Universal Decimal Classification (UDC) and the challenges for a KOS service provider to maintain an LD service. UDC was created during the period 1896-1904 to support systematic organization and information retrieval of a bibliography. When discussing UDC as LD we make a distinction between two types of UDC data or two provenances: UDC source data, and UDC codes as they appear in metadata. To serve the purpose of supplying semantics one has to front-end UDC LD with a service that can parse and interpret complex UDC strings. While the use of UDC is free the publishing and distributing of UDC data is protected by a licence. Publishing of UDC both as LD and as LOD must be provided for within a complex service that would allow open access as well as access through a paywall barrier for different levels of licences. The practical task of publishing the UDC as LOD was informed by the "10Things guidelines." The process includes conceptual parts and technological parts. The transition to a new technology is never a purely mechanical act but is a research endeavour in its own right. The UDC case has shown the importance of cross-domain, interdisciplinary collaboration which needs experts well situated in multiple knowledge domains.
1.0 Introduction Linked data (LD) technology is hailed as a long-awaited solution in web-based information exchange which removes obstacles imposed by platform- and domain-dependent formats and standards. It is also seen as another way to organise information, in graph-like structures rather than in database structures. `Open' LD, as part of the Linked Open Data (LOD) cloud, brings this to another level by enabling meaningful linking of resources and creating a global, openly accessible knowledge graph with almost unlimited potential for generating
 Over the years, the UDC linked data project has benefited from expert help by Christophe Guéret who was first to propose the UDC linked data as a lookup service supporting a more complex model of UDC publishing, Chris Overfield for his contribution in setting up RDF stores and putting the service together and Attila Piros for developing the new UDC parser. Finally, this project benefited greatly from the DiKG project for making it possible to bring the UDC LD data project to completion.
69

new and unexpected associations between dispersed bits of information. The custodians of the LOD cloud, its main technologies and methods, are part of the scientific community of the semantic web. They bring together consortia and forums such as W3C, DCMI (Dublin Core Metadata Initiative), BIBFRAME (Bibliographic Framework Initiative), LD4L (Linked Data for Libraries), semantic web conferences (such as ESWC, ISWC), etc. But, the user base of LOD or LD technology is far broader, encompassing information processes and services in economy, science and society at large. Consequently, the LD technology is a very dynamic and fast-growing field. In this chapter we would like to contribute to the exchange of experiences among those who adopt this technology. Our case is the Universal Decimal Classification (UDC), and we will discuss the challenges for a knowledge organization system (KOS) service provider (in our case the UDC Consortium) to maintain an LD service.
The UDC as a showcase provides an insight into the reasoning, procedures and challenges associated with applying LD in the bibliographic domain, specifically with respect to KOSs as bibliographic tools. The expression bibliographic sector or bibliographic domain covers activities, agencies and services concerned with preserving, collecting and organizing recorded information and facilitating information discovery and access since the beginning of literacy. The bibliographic domain comprises the library sector, information and documentation centres, the publishing sector, services such as bibliographic and abstracting services, citation indexes and full text bibliographic services (e.g. Citation Index, Chemical Abstracts, Ebsco, Inspec, ARIBIB). Since the end of the 19th century the bibliographic domain has been creating international standards for describing and indexing information resources, such as cataloguing standards, KOSs, and later, in the computer era, data coding and bibliographic data standards (e.g., the MAchine-Readable Cataloging or MARC family of standards), data and service protocols, etc. These tools and standards have been enabling international exchange and cross-collection information discovery among libraries and between libraries and bibliographic services or publishers.
The UDC was one of the pioneering tools designed to meet the growing information needs of industrialisation and to support opportunities for learning and bettering the society which came with it. To better understand the challenges when publishing a bibliographical tool such as UDC as LD, in Section 2 we will remind the reader of some fundamentals of information and knowledge organization as applied in the bibliographic domain. These are very basic, but often, maybe because they are so basic, they are not articulated or made explicit. We continue in Section 3 to present the UDC as an exemplary case, outlining the main features of a classification and its own trajectory into automatization. In section 4, we elaborate on the identified challenges when it comes to sensible LD publishing of a system as complex and long lived as the UDC. Section 5 presents the technological choices made to respond to those challenges. In section 6, we conclude by summarizing our understanding of how legacy collections and tools used in information discovery can enrich and inspire the ways in which the LD technology may be applied in the future.
2.0 Information organization, knowledge organization and linked data 2.1 Visions and foundations Until the advent of the internet and the semantic web, i.e. LD technology in particular, a bibliographic domain was a relatively isolated information space with limited options for merging with or allowing information linking with other information domains (scientific
70

