dyngraph2vec: Capturing Network Dynamics using Dynamic Graph Representation Learning
Palash Goyal
University of Southern California, Information Sciences Institute 4676 Admiralty Way, Suite 1001. Marina del Rey, CA. 90292, USA
Sujit Rokka Chhetri
University of California-Irvine Irvine, CA. 92697, USA
Arquimedes Canedo
Siemens Corporate Technology 755 College Rd E, Princeton, NJ. 08540, USA

arXiv:1809.02657v2 [cs.SI] 2 Jul 2019

Abstract
Learning graph representations is a fundamental task aimed at capturing various properties of graphs in vector space. The most recent methods learn such representations for static networks. However, real-world networks evolve over time and have varying dynamics. Capturing such evolution is key to predicting the properties of unseen networks. To understand how the network dynamics affect the prediction performance, we propose an embedding approach which learns the structure of evolution in dynamic graphs and can predict unseen links with higher precision. Our model, dyngraph2vec, learns the temporal transitions in the network using a deep architecture composed of dense and recurrent layers. We motivate the need for capturing dynamics for the prediction on a toy data set created using stochastic block models. We then demonstrate the efficacy of dyngraph2vec over existing state-ofthe-art methods on two real-world data sets. We observe that learning dynamics can improve the quality of embedding and yield better performance in link prediction.
Keywords: Graph embedding techniques, Graph embedding applications, Python Graph Embedding Methods GEM Library

1. Introduction
Understanding and analyzing graphs is an essential topic that has been widely studied over the past decades. Many realworld problems can be formulated as link predictions in graphs [1, 2, 3, 4]. For example, link prediction in an author collaboration network [1] can be used to predict potential future author collaboration. Similarly, new connections between proteins can be discovered using protein interaction networks [5], and new friendships can be predicted using social networks [6]. Recent work on obtaining such predictions use graph representation learning. These methods represent each node in the network with a fixed dimensional embedding and map link prediction in the network space to the nearest neighbor search in the embedding space [7]. It has been shown that such techniques can outperform traditional link prediction methods on graphs [8, 9].
Existing works on graph representation learning primarily focus on static graphs of two types: (i) aggregated, consisting of all edges until time T ; and (ii) snapshot, which comprise of edges at the current time step t. These models learn latent representations of the static graph and use them to predict missing links [10, 11, 12, 13, 8, 9, 14]. However, real networks often have complex dynamics which govern their evolution. As an

t

A

B

t+1
B

t+2
B

C

A

C

C

D

D

A

D

Figure 1: User A breaks ties with his friend at each time step and befriends a friend of a friend. Such temporal patterns require knowledge across multiple time steps for accurate prediction.
illustration, consider the social network shown in Figure 1. In this example, user A moves from one friend to another in such a way that only a friend of a friend is followed and making sure not to befriend an old friend. Methods based on static networks can only observe the network at time t + 1 and cannot ascertain if A will befriend B or D in the next time step. Instead, observing multiple snapshots can capture the network dynamics and predict A's connection to D with high certainty.
In this work, we aim to capture the underlying network dynamics of evolution. Given temporal snapshots of graphs, our goal is to learn a representation of nodes at each time step while capturing the dynamics such that we can predict their fu-

Preprint submitted to Knowledge Based Systems

July 3, 2019

ture connections. Learning such representations is a challenging task. Firstly, the temporal patterns may exist over varying period lengths. For example, in Figure 1, user A may hold to each friend for a varying k length. Secondly, different vertices may have different patterns. In Figure 1, user A may break ties with friends whereas other users continue with their ties. Capturing such variations is extremely challenging. Existing research builds upon simplified assumptions to overcome these challenges. Methods including DynamicTriad [15], DynGEM [16] and TIMERS [17] assume that the patterns are of short duration (length 2) and only consider the previous time step graph to predict new links. Furthermore, DynGEM and TIMERS make the assumption that the changes are smooth and use a regularization to disallow rapid changes.
In this work, we present a model which overcomes the above challenges. dyngraph2vec uses multiple non-linear layers to learn structural patterns in each network. Furthermore, it uses recurrent layers to learn the temporal transitions in the network. The look back parameter in the recurrent layers controls the length of temporal patterns learned. We focus our experiments on the task of link prediction. We compare dyngraph2vec with the state-of-the-art algorithms for dynamic graph embedding and show its performance on several real-world networks including collaboration networks and social networks. Our experiments show that using a deep model with recurrent layers can capture temporal dynamics of the networks and significantly outperform the state-of-the-art methods on link prediction. We emphasize that our work is targeted towards link prediction and not node classification. Furthermore, our algorithm works on both aggregated and snapshot temporal graphs.
Overall, our paper makes the following contributions:
1. We propose dyngraph2vec, a dynamic graph embedding model which captures temporal dynamics.
2. We demonstrate that capturing network dynamics can significantly improve the performance on link prediction.
3. We present variations of our model to show the key advantages and differences.
4. We publish a library, DynamicGEM 1, implementing the variations of our model and state-of-the-art dynamic embedding approaches.
2. Related Work
Graph representation learning techniques can be broadly divided into two categories: (i) static graph embedding, which represents each node in the graph with a single vector; and (ii) dynamic graph embedding, which considers multiple snapshots of a graph and obtains a time series of vectors for each node. Most analysis has been done on static graph embedding. Recently, however, some works have been devoted to studying dynamic graph embedding.
1https://github.com/palash1992/DynamicGEM

2.1. Static Graph Embedding
Methods to represent nodes of a graph typically aim to preserve certain properties of the original graph in the embedding space. Based on this observation, methods can be divided into (i) distance preserving, and (ii) structure preserving. Distance preserving methods devise objective functions such that the distance between nodes in the original graph and the embedding space have similar rankings. For example, Laplacian Eigenmaps [18] minimizes the sum of the distance between the embeddings of neighboring nodes under the constraints of translational invariance, thus keeping the nodes close in the embedding space. Similarly, Graph Factorization [10] approximates the edge weight with the dot product of the nodes' embeddings, thus preserving distance in the inner product space. Recent methods have gone further to preserve higher order distances. Higher Order Proximity Embedding (HOPE) [9] uses multiple higher-order functions to compute a similarity matrix from a graph's adjacency matrix and uses Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) to learn the representation. GraRep [12] considers the node transition matrix and its higher powers to construct a similarity matrix.
On the other hand, structure-preserving methods aim to preserve the roles of individual nodes in the graph. node2vec [8] uses a combination of breadth-first search and depth-first search to find nodes similar to a node in terms of distance and role. Recently, deep learning methods to learn network representations have been proposed. These methods inherently preserve the higher order graph properties including distance and structure. SDNE [19], DNGR [20] and VGAE [21] use deep autoencoders for this purpose. Some other recent approaches use graph convolutional networks to learn inherent graph structure [22, 23, 24].
2.2. Dynamic Graph Embedding
Embedding dynamic graphs is an emerging topic still under investigation. Some methods have been proposed to extend static graph embedding approaches by adding regularization [25, 17]. DynGEM [26] uses the learned embedding from previous time step graphs to initialize the current time step embedding. Although it does not explicitly use regularization, such initialization implicitly keeps the new embedding close to the previous. DynamicTriad [15] relaxes the temporal smoothness assumption but only considers patterns spanning two-time steps. TIMERS [17] incrementally updates the embedding using incremental Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) and reruns SVD when the error increases above a threshold.
DYLINK2VEC [27] learns embedding of links (node pairs instead of nodes) and uses temporal functions to learn patterns over time.
Link embedding renders the method non-scalable for graphs with high density. Our model uses recurrent layers to learn temporal patterns over long sequences of graphs and multiple fully connected layer to capture intricate patterns at each time step.

2

