arXiv:1903.03894v4 [cs.LG] 13 Nov 2019

GNNExplainer: Generating Explanations for Graph Neural Networks
Rex Ying Dylan Bourgeois, Jiaxuan You Marinka Zitnik Jure Leskovec
Department of Computer Science, Stanford University Robust.AI
{rexying, dtsbourg, jiaxuan, marinka, jure}@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) are a powerful tool for machine learning on graphs. GNNs combine node feature information with the graph structure by recursively passing neural messages along edges of the input graph. However, incorporating both graph structure and feature information leads to complex models and explaining predictions made by GNNs remains unsolved. Here we propose GNNEXPLAINER, the first general, model-agnostic approach for providing interpretable explanations for predictions of any GNN-based model on any graph-based machine learning task. Given an instance, GNNEXPLAINER identifies a compact subgraph structure and a small subset of node features that have a crucial role in GNN's prediction. Further, GNNEXPLAINER can generate consistent and concise explanations for an entire class of instances. We formulate GNNEXPLAINER as an optimization task that maximizes the mutual information between a GNN's prediction and distribution of possible subgraph structures. Experiments on synthetic and real-world graphs show that our approach can identify important graph structures as well as node features, and outperforms alternative baseline approaches by up to 43.0% in explanation accuracy. GNNEXPLAINER provides a variety of benefits, from the ability to visualize semantically relevant structures to interpretability, to giving insights into errors of faulty GNNs.
1 Introduction
In many real-world applications, including social, information, chemical, and biological domains, data can be naturally modeled as graphs [9, 41, 49]. Graphs are powerful data representations but are challenging to work with because they require modeling of rich relational information as well as node feature information [45, 46]. To address this challenge, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as state-of-the-art for machine learning on graphs, due to their ability to recursively incorporate information from neighboring nodes in the graph, naturally capturing both graph structure and node features [16, 21, 40, 44].
Despite their strengths, GNNs lack transparency as they do not easily allow for a human-intelligible explanation of their predictions. Yet, the ability to understand GNN's predictions is important and useful for several reasons: (i) it can increase trust in the GNN model, (ii) it improves model's transparency in a growing number of decision-critical applications pertaining to fairness, privacy and other safety challenges [11], and (iii) it allows practitioners to get an understanding of the network characteristics, identify and correct systematic patterns of mistakes made by models before deploying them in the real world.
While currently there are no methods for explaining GNNs, recent approaches for explaining other types of neural networks have taken one of two main routes. One line of work locally approximates
33rd Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver, Canada.

GNN model training and predictions

Explaning GNN's predictions

GNNExplainer

Figure 1: GNNEXPLAINER provides interpretable explanations for predictions made by any GNN model on any graph-based machine learning task. Shown is a hypothetical node classification task where a GNN model  is trained on a social interaction graph to predict future sport activities. Given a trained GNN  and a prediction y^i = "Basketball" for person vi, GNNEXPLAINER generates an explanation by identifying a small subgraph of the input graph together with a small subset of node features (shown on the right) that are most influential for y^i. Examining explanation for y^i, we see that many friends in one part of vi's social circle enjoy ball games, and so the GNN predicts that vi will like basketball. Similarly, examining explanation for y^j, we see that vj's friends and friends of his friends enjoy water and beach sports, and so the GNN predicts y^j = "Sailing."
models with simpler surrogate models, which are then probed for explanations [25, 29, 30]. Other methods carefully examine models for relevant features and find good qualitative interpretations of high level features [6, 13, 27, 32] or identify influential input instances [23, 38]. However, these approaches fall short in their ability to incorporate relational information, the essence of graphs. Since this aspect is crucial for the success of machine learning on graphs, any explanation of GNN's predictions should leverage rich relational information provided by the graph as well as node features.
Here we propose GNNEXPLAINER, an approach for explaining predictions made by GNNs. GNNEXPLAINER takes a trained GNN and its prediction(s), and it returns an explanation in the form of a small subgraph of the input graph together with a small subset of node features that are most influential for the prediction(s) (Figure 1). The approach is model-agnostic and can explain predictions of any GNN on any machine learning task for graphs, including node classification, link prediction, and graph classification. It handles single- as well as multi-instance explanations. In the case of single-instance explanations, GNNEXPLAINER explains a GNN's prediction for one particular instance (i.e., a node label, a new link, a graph-level label). In the case of multi-instance explanations, GNNEXPLAINER provides an explanation that consistently explains a set of instances (e.g., nodes of a given class).
GNNEXPLAINER specifies an explanation as a rich subgraph of the entire graph the GNN was trained on, such that the subgraph maximizes the mutual information with GNN's prediction(s). This is achieved by formulating a mean field variational approximation and learning a real-valued graph mask which selects the important subgraph of the GNN's computation graph. Simultaneously, GNNEXPLAINER also learns a feature mask that masks out unimportant node features (Figure 1).
We evaluate GNNEXPLAINER on synthetic as well as real-world graphs. Experiments show that GNNEXPLAINER provides consistent and concise explanations of GNN's predictions. On synthetic graphs with planted network motifs, which play a role in determining node labels, we show that GNNEXPLAINER accurately identifies the subgraphs/motifs as well as node features that determine node labels outperforming alternative baseline approaches by up to 43.0% in explanation accuracy. Further, using two real-world datasets we show how GNNEXPLAINER can provide important domain insights by robustly identifying important graph structures and node features that influence a GNN's predictions. Specifically, using molecular graphs and social interaction networks, we show that GNNEXPLAINER can identify important domain-specific graph structures, such as N O2 chemical groups or ring structures in molecules, and star structures in Reddit threads. Overall, experiments demonstrate that GNNEXPLAINER provides consistent and concise explanations for GNN-based models for different machine learning tasks on graphs.
2 Related work
Although the problem of explaining GNNs is not well-studied, the related problems of interpretability and neural debugging received substantial attention in machine learning. At a high level, we can group those interpretability methods for non-graph neural networks into two main families.
2

