arXiv:1801.10247v1 [cs.LG] 30 Jan 2018

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
FASTGCN: FAST LEARNING WITH GRAPH CONVOLUTIONAL NETWORKS VIA IMPORTANCE SAMPLING
Jie Chen, Tengfei Ma, Cao Xiao IBM Research chenjie@us.ibm.com, Tengfei.Ma1@ibm.com, cxiao@us.ibm.com
ABSTRACT
The graph convolutional networks (GCN) recently proposed by Kipf and Welling are an effective graph model for semi-supervised learning. This model, however, was originally designed to be learned with the presence of both training and test data. Moreover, the recursive neighborhood expansion across layers poses time and memory challenges for training with large, dense graphs. To relax the requirement of simultaneous availability of test data, we interpret graph convolutions as integral transforms of embedding functions under probability measures. Such an interpretation allows for the use of Monte Carlo approaches to consistently estimate the integrals, which in turn leads to a batched training scheme as we propose in this work--FastGCN. Enhanced with importance sampling, FastGCN not only is efficient for training but also generalizes well for inference. We show a comprehensive set of experiments to demonstrate its effectiveness compared with GCN and related models. In particular, training is orders of magnitude more efficient while predictions remain comparably accurate.
1 INTRODUCTION
Graphs are universal representations of pairwise relationship. Many real world data come naturally in the form of graphs; e.g., social networks, gene expression networks, and knowledge graphs. To improve the performance of graph-based learning tasks, such as node classification and link prediction, recently much effort is made to extend well-established network architectures, including recurrent neural networks (RNN) and convolutional neural networks (CNN), to graph data; see, e.g., Bruna et al. (2013); Duvenaud et al. (2015); Li et al. (2015); Jain et al. (2015); Henaff et al. (2015); Niepert et al. (2016); Kipf & Welling (2016a;b).
Whereas learning feature representations for graphs is an important subject among this effort, here, we focus on the feature representations for graph vertices. In this vein, the closest work that applies a convolution architecture is the graph convolutional network (GCN) (Kipf & Welling, 2016a;b). Borrowing the concept of a convolution filter for image pixels or a linear array of signals, GCN uses the connectivity structure of the graph as the filter to perform neighborhood mixing. The architecture may be elegantly summarized by the following expression:
H(l+1) = (A^H(l)W (l)),
where A^ is some normalization of the graph adjacency matrix, H(l) contains the embedding (rowwise) of the graph vertices in the lth layer, W (l) is a parameter matrix, and  is nonlinearity.
As with many graph algorithms, the adjacency matrix encodes the pairwise relationship for both training and test data. The learning of the model as well as the embedding is performed for both data simultaneously, at least as the authors proposed. For many applications, however, test data may not be readily available, because the graph may be constantly expanding with new vertices (e.g. new members of a social network, new products to a recommender system, and new drugs for functionality tests). Such scenarios require an inductive scheme that learns a model from only a training set of vertices and that generalizes well to any augmentation of the graph.
These two authors contribute equally.
1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2018
A more severe challenge for GCN is that the recursive expansion of neighborhoods across layers incurs expensive computations in batched training. Particularly for dense graphs and powerlaw graphs, the expansion of the neighborhood for a single vertex quickly fills up a large portion of the graph. Then, a usual mini-batch training will involve a large amount of data for every batch, even with a small batch size. Hence, scalability is a pressing issue to resolve for GCN to be applicable to large, dense graphs.
To address both challenges, we propose to view graph convolutions from a different angle and interpret them as integral transforms of embedding functions under probability measures. Such a view provides a principled mechanism for inductive learning, starting from the formulation of the loss to the stochastic version of the gradient. Specifically, we interpret that graph vertices are iid samples of some probability distribution and write the loss and each convolution layer as integrals with respect to vertex embedding functions. Then, the integrals are evaluated through Monte Carlo approximation that defines the sample loss and the sample gradient. One may further alter the sampling distribution (as in importance sampling) to reduce the approximation variance.
The proposed approach, coined FastGCN, not only rids the reliance on the test data but also yields a controllable cost for per-batch computation. At the time of writing, we notice a newly published work GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017) that proposes also the use of sampling to reduce the computational footprint of GCN. Our sampling scheme is more economic, resulting in a substantial saving in the gradient computation, as will be analyzed in more detail in Section 3.3. Experimental results in Section 4 indicate that the per-batch computation of FastGCN is more than an order of magnitude faster than that of GraphSAGE, while classification accuracies are highly comparable.
2 RELATED WORK
Over the past few years, several graph-based convolution network models emerged for addressing applications of graph-structured data, such as the representation of molecules (Duvenaud et al., 2015). An important stream of work is built on spectral graph theory (Bruna et al., 2013; Henaff et al., 2015; Defferrard et al., 2016). They define parameterized filters in the spectral domain, inspired by graph Fourier transform. These approaches learn a feature representation for the whole graph and may be used for graph classification.
Another line of work learns embeddings for graph vertices, for which Goyal & Ferrara (2017) is a recent survey that covers comprehensively several categories of methods. A major category consists of factorization based algorithms that yield the embedding through matrix factorizations; see, e.g., Roweis & Saul (2000); Belkin & Niyogi (2001); Ahmed et al. (2013); Cao et al. (2015); Ou et al. (2016). These methods learn the representations of training and test data jointly. Another category is random walk based methods (Perozzi et al., 2014; Grover & Leskovec, 2016) that compute node representations through exploration of neighborhoods. LINE (Tang et al., 2015) is also such a technique that is motivated by the preservation of the first and second-order proximities. Meanwhile, there appear a few deep neural network architectures, which better capture the nonlinearity within graphs, such as SDNE (Wang et al., 2016). As motivated earlier, GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2016a) is the model on which our work is based.
The most relevant work to our approach is GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017), which learns node representations through aggregation of neighborhood information. One of the proposed aggregators employs the GCN architecture. The authors also acknowledge the memory bottleneck of GCN and hence propose an ad hoc sampling scheme to restrict the neighborhood size. Our sampling approach is based on a different and more principled formulation. The major distinction is that we sample vertices rather than neighbors. The resulting computational savings are analyzed in Section 3.3.
3 TRAINING AND INFERENCE THROUGH SAMPLING
One striking difference between GCN and many standard neural network architectures is the lack of independence in the sample loss. Training algorithms such as SGD and its batch generalization are designed based on the additive nature of the loss function with respect to independent data samples. For graphs, on the other hand, each vertex is convolved with all its neighbors and hence defining a sample gradient that is efficient to compute is beyond straightforward.
2

