On the Convergence Rates of Learning-based Signature Generation Schemes to Contain Self-propagating Malware

Saeed Valizadeh Dept. Computer Science and Engineering
University of Connecticut Storrs, CT, USA
saeed.val@uconn.edu

Marten van Dijk Dept. Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Connecticut Storrs, CT, USA
marten.van dijk@uconn.edu

arXiv:1905.00154v1 [cs.CR] 1 May 2019

Abstract--In this paper, we investigate the importance of a defense system's learning rates to fight against the self-propagating class of malware such as worms and bots. To this end, we introduce a new propagation model based on the interactions between an adversary (and its agents) who wishes to construct a zombie army of a specific size, and a defender taking advantage of standard security tools and technologies such as honeypots (HPs) and intrusion detection and prevention systems (IDPSes) in the network environment. As time goes on, the defender can incrementally learn from the collected/observed attack samples (e.g., malware payloads), and therefore being able to generate attack signatures. The generated signatures then are used for filtering next attack traffic and thus containing the attacker's progress in its malware propagation mission. Using simulation and numerical analysis, we evaluate the efficacy of signature generation algorithms and in general any learning-based scheme in bringing an adversary's maneuvering in the environment to a halt as an adversarial containment strategy.
Index Terms--Botnet, Malware propagation modeling, Selfreplicating code, Worms, Intrusion detection and prevention system, Honeypots, Security games
I. INTRODUCTION
With the rise of advanced and novel malware (e.g., Stuxnet worm [1], and WannaCry ransomware cryptoworm [2]) and the expanding population of Internet residents, especially the explosion of connected Internet of Things (IoT) devices, new methods, and research for understanding malware behaviors and jousting with sophisticated botnets seem to be crucial. Of specific interest to us are two types of malware, worms [3], and autonomous bots [4], mainly due to their wideranging audience, and self-propagating characteristics. These types of malware execute a "seek-and-infect" mission strategy. For instance, a scanning worm conventionally infects a target by utilizing vulnerability exploitation, and it automatically probes the environment to independently propagate itself (or modified copies of itself) from the infected machine to other vulnerable hosts in a network. Consequently, a straightforward way of assembling an army of infected hosts is spreading the malicious code in the form of a scanning worm. This zombie army which is also known as a botnet is indeed a collection of compromised machines distributed over a network (usually the Internet) and controlled by its originator (known as a
This work was funded by NSF grant CNS-1413996 "MACS: A Modular Approach to Cloud Security."

botmaster) through a command and control (C&C) structure [5]. Afterward, these infiltrated workstations (bots) can be managed for different malicious purposes including but not limited to ransom campaigns, massive spam-marketing, largescale information harvesting and processing, click fraud, payper installation, and, distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks.
The never-ending battle between adversaries and system defenders drives both parties to improve their methods and technologies to enhance their chances of prosperity. On the one hand, attackers and network penetrators come up with new attack methods and evasion techniques to bypass (or even deny) defensive systems in any possible manner. Code obfuscation, session splicing, fragmentation attacks, string matching and DDoS attacks [6] are among the most common techniques used by the adversaries to decrease the attack detection probability or to increase the chances of attack prosperity. An armored malware (e.g., a metamorphic or polymorphic worm) buys itself more propagation time by being hard to identify and disassemble. On the other hand, a large number of studies on malware detection/prevention techniques, IDPSes, and HP technologies have been carried out to present more effective methods and designs to reach better accuracy and performance [7­9]. For instance, fast and automatic signature generation schemes are introduced to fight against even the mightiest type of malware [10­16]. Some claim that they can generate high-quality signatures (with negligible false alarm rates) based on only a few malware samples1 usually captured via honeypots or a heuristic flow classifier.
Although there exist various number of research for wormlike malware propagation modeling, in addition to proposals for containment strategies such as content-based filtering based on automatic and distributed signature generation of the malware, the question unanswered here is how and why does the malware spread, especially the kinds targeting a broad audience, if it is the case that we can generate high quality and reliable signatures, even for an armored malware? Our Approach. To answer such questions, the effectiveness of
1E.g., see Hamsa [14] which only requires 100-500 malware samples in the suspicious flow pool to reach a %5 false negative rate, even for a previously unknown worm

content-based filtering strategies2 based on automatic signature generation schemes must be studied. Hence, in this paper, instead of presenting yet another malware detection/prevention methodology, we revisit the spread of malware phenomenon, especially the self-propagating ones such as worms and bots, from a new perspective. We introduce a new model for capturing the interactions of an adversary and its agents with the defensive system during the early phases of a zombie army construction. Unlike a malware propagator who usually follows a passive attack strategy for malware distribution to a broad audience, meaning that the attack technology usually remains the same after unleashing the first few samples of the malware, the defender can incrementally learn regarding the attack technology (specifically, from observed malware payloads). As time elapses, and the defender captures more attack data, it can reach better detection rates and accuracy. This learning rate indeed reflects into higher quality malware signatures which can be used for online malicious traffic filtering and hence malware containment purposes.
Contributions & Results. The main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows:
· Motivated by the advances in networking infrastructure and technologies such as the introduction of softwaredefined networking (SDN), and also the widespread embrace of automated machine learning (AutoML) techniques in different realms of networking and security fields, we introduce a novel malware propagation model called "learning-based model" suitable for today's technologies and more advanced malware.
· The previous outdated models are mainly focused on the attacker's strategies (specifically target discovery and scanning rates [17­19]), or in best cases, an ill-defined cleaning of the infection or patching processes [20­22]. However, we show how the increased knowledge of the defender can be taken into consideration by modeling the learning rate of the defense system as a function f (l) (which is the probability of detecting and filtering a next malicious payload) where l represents the number of malicious payloads for a specific exploit so far collected.
· The model leads to the development of an automatic selfreplicating malware containment strategy that prevents the spread of the malware beyond its early stages of propagation.
· We provide precise conditions on the convergence rates of a learning-based signature generation algorithm that determines whether the malware spread will ultimately settle or not.
· We derive tight upper and lower bounds on the total number of hosts the malware propagator can infect.
· The model is general enough and enables us to evaluate the effectiveness of learning-based signature generation schemes and containment strategies.
2As one of the most effective and feasible solutions to tackle the spreading of worm-like malware

·

We

study

learning

functions

of

the

form

f

(l)

=

(

A A+l

)

in

which A is considered to slow down the learning process,

and  is the amplification factor in the learning. This

enables us to capture characteristics of both yesteryears malware (e.g., a monomorphic worm) and also today's

more advanced ones such as polymorphic malware.

· Numerical analysis and simulation results show that regardless of attacker's scanning rates, with a proper learning function that converges fast enough to 1, the

propagation will be contained and only a negligible

number of susceptible population will be infected.

Paper Organization. The rest of this paper is organized as fol-

lows. Section II briefly reviews existing worm-like malware's

propagation models in addition to automatic signature generation schemes and content-based filtering of such malware. We

present a new learning-based propagation model in section

III followed by the corresponding numerical analysis and simulation results of this model for various learning functions in section IV, and V. We finally conclude the paper and discuss

future works in section VI.

II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
The three potential solutions to mitigate a self-replicating code's rampancy are prevention, treatment, and containment strategies. The prevention and treatment schemes can be summarized as following secure software/application development procedures in hopes of having vulnerability-free software, or patching/updating vulnerable systems as soon as vulnerabilities are discovered. Unlike the containment techniques, such conducts are usually vital for pre/post incident time and not during the period of an incident. In this section, we first review content-based filtering and automatic signature generation schemes as the most effective containment strategy [23] to hinder the spread of a malware. Moreover, we study some of the most relevant propagation models existing in the literature before presenting our model.

A. Content-based filtering and Automatic Signature Generation Schemes
Human interventions and attack response time must be minimized in order to be able to prevent widespread infections. To this end, automatic, distributed and real-time detection and containment strategies, even for the mightiest type of worm, i.e., a polymorphic one, are introduced in the literature. Such signature-based detection and prevention techniques are of particular interest of this work as "an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure" meaning that such containment strategies can be very efficient for thwarting the spread of malware, especially during the early phases of a botnet construction and worm propagation, only if a high-quality signature can be generated (automatically). Such signatures can be created based on various attributes (e.g., length of the fields or invariant substrings of the byte sequences) of a class of malware, and later these signatures will be used for content-based malicious traffic filtering (even for extreme cases such as previously unknown malware or an armored

