Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020

arXiv:1907.04931v4 [cs.LG] 16 Feb 2020

GraphSAINT: GRAPH SAMPLING BASED INDUCTIVE LEARNING METHOD

Hanqing Zeng University of Southern California zengh@usc.edu
Ajitesh Srivastava University of Southern California ajiteshs@usc.edu
Viktor Prasanna University of Southern California prasanna@usc.edu

Hongkuan Zhou University of Southern California hongkuaz@usc.edu
Rajgopal Kannan US Army Research Lab rajgopal.kannan.civ@mail.mil

ABSTRACT
Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) are powerful models for learning representations of attributed graphs. To scale GCNs to large graphs, state-of-the-art methods use various layer sampling techniques to alleviate the "neighbor explosion" problem during minibatch training. We propose GraphSAINT, a graph sampling based inductive learning method that improves training efficiency and accuracy in a fundamentally different way. By changing perspective, GraphSAINT constructs minibatches by sampling the training graph, rather than the nodes or edges across GCN layers. Each iteration, a complete GCN is built from the properly sampled subgraph. Thus, we ensure fixed number of well-connected nodes in all layers. We further propose normalization technique to eliminate bias, and sampling algorithms for variance reduction. Importantly, we can decouple the sampling from the forward and backward propagation, and extend GraphSAINT with many architecture variants (e.g., graph attention, jumping connection). GraphSAINT demonstrates superior performance in both accuracy and training time on five large graphs, and achieves new state-of-the-art F1 scores for PPI (0.995) and Reddit (0.970).
1 INTRODUCTION
Recently, representation learning on graphs has attracted much attention, since it greatly facilitates tasks such as classification and clustering (Wu et al., 2019; Cai et al., 2017). Current works on Graph Convolutional Networks (GCNs) (Hamilton et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018b; Gao et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2018a) mostly focus on shallow models (2 layers) on relatively small graphs. Scaling GCNs to larger datasets and deeper layers still requires fast alternate training methods.
In a GCN, data to be gathered for one output node comes from its neighbors in the previous layer. Each of these neighbors in turn, gathers its output from the previous layer, and so on. Clearly, the deeper we back track, the more multi-hop neighbors to support the computation of the root. The number of support nodes (and thus the training time) potentially grows exponentially with the GCN depth. To mitigate such "neighbor explosion", state-of-the-art methods use various layer sampling techniques. The works by Hamilton et al. (2017); Ying et al. (2018a); Chen et al. (2018a) ensure that only a small number of neighbors (typically from 2 to 50) are selected by one node in the next layer. Chen et al. (2018b) and Huang et al. (2018) further propose samplers to restrict the neighbor expansion factor to 1, by ensuring a fixed sample size in all layers. While these methods significantly speed up training, they face challenges in scalability, accuracy or computation complexity.
Equal contribution
1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
Present work We present GraphSAINT (Graph SAmpling based INductive learning meThod) to efficiently train deep GCNs. GraphSAINT is developed from a fundamentally different way of minibatch construction. Instead of building a GCN on the full training graph and then sampling across the layers, we sample the training graph first and then build a full GCN on the subgraph. Our method is thus graph sampling based. Naturally, GraphSAINT resolves "neighbor explosion", since every GCN of the minibatches is a small yet complete one. On the other hand, graph sampling based method also brings new challenges in training. Intuitively, nodes of higher influence on each other should have higher probability to form a subgraph. This enables the sampled nodes to "support" each other without going outside the minibatch. Unfortunately, such strategy results in non-identical node sampling probability, and introduces bias in the minibatch estimator. To address this issue, we develop normalization techniques so that the feature learning does not give preference to nodes more frequently sampled. To further improve training quality, we perform variance reduction analysis, and design light-weight sampling algorithms by quantifying "influence" of neighbors. Experiments on GraphSAINT using five large datasets show significant performance gain in both training accuracy and time. We also demonstrate the flexibility of GraphSAINT by integrating our minibatch method with popular GCN architectures such as JK-net (Xu et al., 2018) and GAT (Velickovic´ et al., 2017). The resulting deep models achieve new state-of-the-art F1 scores on PPI (0.995) and Reddit (0.970).
2 RELATED WORK
A neural network model that extends convolution operation to the graph domain is first proposed by Bruna et al. (2013). Further, Kipf & Welling (2016); Defferrard et al. (2016) speed up graph convolution computation with localized filters based on Chebyshev expansion. They target relatively small datasets and thus the training proceeds in full batch. In order to scale GCNs to large graphs, layer sampling techniques (Hamilton et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2018b; Ying et al., 2018a; Chen et al., 2018a; Gao et al., 2018; Huang et al., 2018) have been proposed for efficient minibatch training. All of them follow the three meta steps: 1. Construct a complete GCN on the full training graph. 2. Sample nodes or edges of each layer to form minibatches. 3. Propagate forward and backward among the sampled GCN. Steps (2) and (3) proceed iteratively to update the weights via stochastic gradient descent. The layer sampling algorithm of GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017) performs uniform node sampling on the previous layer neighbors. It enforces a pre-defined budget on the sample size, so as to bound the minibatch computation complexity. Ying et al. (2018a) enhances the layer sampler of Hamilton et al. (2017) by introducing an importance score to each neighbor. The algorithm presumably leads to less information loss due to weighted aggregation. S-GCN (Chen et al., 2018a) further restricts neighborhood size by requiring only two support nodes in the previous layer. The idea is to use the historical activations in the previous layer to avoid redundant re-evaluation. FastGCN (Chen et al., 2018b) performs sampling from another perspective. Instead of tracking down the inter-layer connections, node sampling is performed independently for each layer. It applies importance sampling to reduce variance, and results in constant sample size in all layers. However, the minibatches potentially become too sparse to achieve high accuracy. Huang et al. (2018) improves FastGCN by an additional sampling neural network. It ensures high accuracy, since sampling is conditioned on the selected nodes in the next layer. Significant overhead may be incurred due to the expensive sampling algorithm and the extra sampler parameters to be learned.
Instead of sampling layers, the works of Zeng et al. (2018) and Chiang et al. (2019) build minibatches from subgraphs. Zeng et al. (2018) proposes a specific graph sampling algorithm to ensure connectivity among minibatch nodes. They further present techniques to scale such training on shared-memory multi-core platforms. More recently, ClusterGCN (Chiang et al., 2019) proposes graph clustering based minibatch training. During pre-processing, the training graph is partitioned into densely connected clusters. During training, clusters are randomly selected to form minibatches, and intra-cluster edge connections remain unchanged. Similar to GraphSAINT, the works of Zeng et al. (2018) and Chiang et al. (2019) do not sample the layers and thus "neighbor explosion" is avoided. Unlike GraphSAINT, both works are heuristic based, and do not account for bias due to the unequal probability of each node / edge appearing in a minibatch.
Another line of research focuses on improving model capacity. Applying attention on graphs, the architectures of Velickovic´ et al. (2017); Zhang et al. (2018); Lu et al. (2019) better capture neighbor features by dynamically adjusting edge weights. Klicpera et al. (2018) combines PageRank with GCNs to enable efficient information propagation from many hops away. To develop deeper models,
2

