Expander Graph Propagation

arXiv:2210.02997v2 [cs.LG] 21 Dec 2022

Andreea Deac Mila, Université de Montréal
deacandr@mila.quebec

Marc Lackenby University of Oxford lackenby@maths.ox.ac.uk

Petar Velickovic´ DeepMind
petarv@deepmind.com

Abstract
Deploying graph neural networks (GNNs) on whole-graph classification or regression tasks is known to be challenging: it often requires computing node features that are mindful of both local interactions in their neighbourhood and the global context of the graph structure. GNN architectures that navigate this space need to avoid pathological behaviours, such as bottlenecks and oversquashing, while ideally having linear time and space complexity requirements. In this work, we propose an elegant approach based on propagating information over expander graphs. We leverage an efficient method for constructing expander graphs of a given size, and use this insight to propose the EGP model. We show that EGP is able to address all of the above concerns, while requiring minimal effort to set up, and provide evidence of its empirical utility on relevant graph classification datasets and baselines in the Open Graph Benchmark. Importantly, using expander graphs as a template for message passing necessarily gives rise to negative curvature. While this appears to be counterintuitive in light of recent related work on oversquashing, we theoretically demonstrate that negatively curved edges are likely to be required to obtain scalable message passing without bottlenecks. To the best of our knowledge, this is a previously unstudied result in the context of graph representation learning, and we believe our analysis paves the way to a novel class of scalable methods to counter oversquashing in GNNs.

1 Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) are a flexible class of models for learning representations over graph-structured data [1]. Their versatility [2­4] and generality [5, 6] has made them a very attractive approach, leading to considerable application in areas as diverse as virtual drug screening [7], traffic prediction [8], combinatorial chip design [9] and pure mathematics [10, 11].
Most GNNs rely on repeatedly propagating information between neighbouring nodes in the graph. This is commonly expressed in the message passing [4] paradigm: nodes send vector-based messages to each other along the edges of the graph, and nodes update their representations by aggregating all the messages sent to them, in a permutation-invariant manner. Under many industrially-relevant tasks, this paradigm is very potent, often allowing for highly scalable model variants [12­14].
However, in many areas of scientific interest, purely local interactions are likely insufficient. Among the principal graph tasks, graph classification is perhaps most ripe with such situations: to meaningfully attach a label to a graph, in many cases it is insufficient to treat graphs as "bags of nodes". For example, when classifying a molecule for its potency as a candidate drug [7], the label is driven by complex substructure interactions in the molecule [15], rather than a naïve sum of atom-level effects.
Accordingly, GNNs deployed in this regime need to update node features in a manner that is mindful of the global properties of the graph. It quickly became apparent that it is often inadequate to merely stack more message passing layers over the input graph. In fact, for many graph classification tasks, such approaches may be weaker than discarding the graph structure altogether [16, 17]. Now, it is well-understood that stacking many local layers leaves GNNs vulnerable to pathological behaviours such as oversquashing [18]. Intuitively, oversquashing occurs when nodes need to store quantities of
A. Deac, M. Lackenby and P. Velickovic´, Expander Graph Propagation. Proceedings of the First Learning on Graphs Conference (LoG 2022), PMLR 198, Virtual Event, December 9­12, 2022.

Expander Graph Propagation

Figure 1: Left: The Cayley graph of SLp2, Z3q, constructed using our method. It has |V | " 24 nodes and it is 4-regular (implying |E| " 2|V |), hence it is sparse. Despite its sparsity, it is highly interconnected: any node is reachable from any other node by no more than 4 hops. Hence, it can serve as a strong "template" for globally propagating node features with a GNN. Right: The Cayley graph of SLp2, Z5q, constructed in an analogous way (with |V | " 120 nodes). A 2-hop neighbourhood of one node (in red) is highlighted, demonstrating its tree-like local structure.

information that are exponentially increasing with model depth [18, Section 5]. Such nodes often arise in the vicinity of bottlenecks in a graph--small collections of edges which are responsible for carrying representations between large groups of nodes. One typical example of such a bottleneck can be

found in a barbell graph

, where the red edge is under significant representational

pressure to transport information between the two communities.

Within this space, we are interested in proposing a method that satisfies four desirable criteria: (C1) it is capable of propagating information globally in the graph; (C2) it is resistant to the oversquashing effect and does not introduce bottlenecks; (C3) its time and space complexity remain subquadratic (tighter than Op|V |2q for sparse graphs); and (C4) it requires no dedicated preprocessing of the input. Satisfying all four of these criteria simultaneously is challenging, and we will survey many of the
popular approaches in the next section--demonstrating ways in which they fail to meet some of them.

In this paper, we identify expander graphs as very attractive objects in this regard. Specifically, they offer a family of graph structures that are fundamentally sparse (|E| " Op|V |q), while having low diameter: thus, any two nodes in an expander graph may reach each other in a short number of hops, eliminating bottlenecks and oversquashing (see Figure 1). Further, we will demonstrate an efficient way to construct a family of expander graphs (leveraging known theoretical results on the special linear group, SLp2, Znq). Once an expander graph of appropriate size is constructed, we can perform a certain number of GNN propagation steps over its structure to globally distribute the nodes' features. Accordingly, we name our method expander graph propagation (EGP).

A key contribution of our work extends the implications of prior art on oversquashing via curvature analysis [19]. According to [19], negatively curved edges are causing the oversquashing effect--yet, counterintuitively, the edges of the expander graphs we construct will always be negatively curved! We prove, however, that our expanders can never be sufficiently negatively curved to trigger the conditions necessary for the results in [19] to be applicable, and show that the existence of negatively curved edges might in fact be required in order to have sparse communication without bottlenecks.

2 Related work
We begin with a survey of the many prior approaches to handling global context in graph representation learning, evaluating them carefully against our four desirable criteria (C1­C4; cf. Table 1). This list is by no means exhaustive, but should be indicative of the most important directions.
Stacking more layers. As already highlighted, one way to achieve global information propagation is to have a deeper GNN. In this case, we are capable of satisfying (C1) and (C4)--no dedicated preprocessing is needed. However, depending on the graph's diameter, we may need up to Op|V |q layers to cover the graph, leading to quadratic complexity (violating (C3)) and introducing a vulnerability to bottlenecks (C2), as theoretically and empirically demonstrated in [18].

2

