OOD-GraphLLM: Graph Large Language Model for Out-of-Distribution Generalized Drug Synergy Prediction

arXiv:2605.30247v1 [cs.LG] 28 May 2026

Xin Wang
DCST, BNRist, Tsinghua University Beijing, China
xin_wang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Yang Yao
DCST, Tsinghua University Beijing, China
yaoyang21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Drug synergy prediction (DSP) aims to identify efficacious drug combinations under various cellular contexts with different targets. However, the continual emergence of novel compounds results in variations in molecular scaffolds and sizes, causing drug synergy data to exhibit out-of-distribution (O.O.D.) shifts with respect to topological structure. Existing works rely on in-distribution (I.D.) assumption, failing to handle the O.O.D. shifts. To solve this problem, we study out-of-distribution generalized drug synergy prediction through a graph large language model for the first time. Nevertheless, O.O.D. generalized DSP is highly non-trivial, posing several challenges: i) how to discover structurally relevant and irrelevant molecular representations with respect to cell targets; ii) how to find the optimal graph neural architectures that accurately calculate molecular representations; and iii) how to jointly leverage molecular structural and semantic information in LLMs. To address these challenges, we propose OOD-GraphLLM, a novel graphLLM framework which is able to accurately predict drug synergy under O.O.D. settings via jointly optimizing molecular graph representation and biomedical semantic language representations in a unified manner. Concretely, we first propose a target-adaptive disentangled molecular graph encoding model to distinguish targetrelevant and target-irrelevant molecular representations for both seen and unseen drugs, then introduce a pairwise attentive graph architecture search algorithm that dynamically finds the best neural architectures to calculate molecular representations for different and new drug pairs, followed by our design of multi-level contextualized cellular feature alignment mechanism to incorporate cell line context information at both structural and semantic levels. Furthermore, we finetune DrugSyn-LLM, a biomedical LLM, and employ

Corresponding author. DCST is the abbreviation for Department of Computer Science and Technology. BNRist is the abbreviation for Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. Conference'17, Washington, DC, USA © 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YYYY/MM https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

Linxin Xiao
DCST, Tsinghua University Beijing, China
xlx21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Wenwu Zhu
DCST, BNRist, Tsinghua University Beijing, China
wwzhu@tsinghua.edu.cn
a retrieval-augmented biomedical instruction tuning strategy to align molecular topological information and molecular semantic information with language-based reasoning for O.O.D. generalized DSP. Extensive experiments under several O.O.D. settings demonstrate that the proposed OOD-GraphLLM consistently outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on various DSP tasks. Both the source code 1 and released model 2 are publicly available, where users are allowed to download model resources and interactively use the system through a web interface.
CCS Concepts
· Applied computing  Bioinformatics; · Computing methodologies  Neural networks.
Keywords
Graph Neural Network (GNN), Large Language Model (LLM), Drug Synergy Prediction (DSP), Out-of-distribution (O.O.D.)
ACM Reference Format: Xin Wang, Linxin Xiao, Yang Yao, and Wenwu Zhu. 2026. OOD-GraphLLM: Graph Large Language Model for Out-of-Distribution Generalized Drug Synergy Prediction. In . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi. org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 Introduction
Drug combination therapy [9] has emerged as a promising strategy for treating complex diseases such as cancer and drug-resistant infections. Compared to single-drug treatments, effective drug combinations can enhance therapeutic efficacy, reduce toxicity, and mitigate the development of resistance. Therefore, Drug synergy prediction (DSP) [15, 20, 24, 31] has become a critical and fundamental problem in computational drug discovery, aiming to identify efficacious drug combinations under various cellular contexts with different cell targets. Recent advances in machine learning, particularly graph neural networks (GNNs) [22, 32, 37], have substantially improved DSP by conducting representation learning over the molecular topological structures of drugs to predict drug-drug synergies. By representing drugs as molecular graphs, existing literature is able to capture topological structural information that
1 https://github.com/EkkoXiao/Bio- GraphLLM 2 https://mn.cs.tsinghua.edu.cn/bio- graphllm/

Conference'17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
plays an important role in determining the corresponding molecular chemical properties.
However, due to the continuous emergence of novel compounds in drug discovery, drug synergy data often exhibit out-of-distribution (O.O.D.) shifts with respect to topological structure at the drug level, primarily caused by variations in molecular scaffolds and compound sizes. This out-of-distribution generalized drug synergy prediction (O.O.D. generalized DSP) problem requires models to generalize well to new drugs and previously unseen molecular scaffolds. Fig. 1 (a) illustrates one example of O.O.D. generalized DSP. Existing works on DSP heavily rely on the in-distribution (I.D.) assumption, where the drug structures tend to remain the same for training and testing data, failing to handle the O.O.D. shifts.
In this paper, we study out-of-distribution generalized drug synergy prediction by resorting to a graph large language model (shown in Fig. 1 (c)), to the best of our knowledge, for the first time. Nevertheless, O.O.D. generalized DSP is highly non-trivial, with several key challenges. For drugs with O.O.D. topological structures,
(1) it is challenging to obtain structurally relevant and irrelevant molecular representations with respect to cell targets;
(2) it is challenging to find the optimal graph neural architecture that can calculate accurate molecular representations;
(3) it is challenging to jointly leverage structural and semantic information from molecules within LLMs.
To address these challenges, we propose OOD-GraphLLM, a novel graphLLM framework capable of accurately predicting drug synergy under O.O.D. setting via joint optimization of molecular graph representation and biomedical semantic language representations in a unified manner. Given new drugs, the proposed OODGraphLLM treats cell lines as contexts, obtains the best graph neural network (GNN) architecture for calculating the new molecular graph representations, aligns these representations with both topological and semantic cellular features, tokenizes all the features as input to a biomedically finetuned LLM for O.O.D. generalized DSP, and optimizes the whole procedure within one single framework.
In concrete, we first propose a target-adaptive disentangled molecular graph encoding model that learns target-relevant and target-irrelevant molecular representations, conditioning the target-relevant representations on various cell targets with disentanglement constraint to preserve target-aware information for new molecular structures. Building upon the target-adaptive disentangled molecular graph representations, we introduce a pairwise attentive graph architecture search algorithm that dynamically finds the optimal graph neural architectures for new drug pairs, allowing for accurate molecular representation learning under distribution shifts. We then design a multi-level contextualized cellular feature alignment mechanism to incorporate cell line information into molecular graph representations as contexts at both the structural and semantic levels. Last but not least, we finetune DrugSyn-LLM, a biomedical LLM, with retrieval-augmented biomedical instruction tuning strategy, aligning molecular topological and semantic information with language-based reasoning to accomplish O.O.D. generalized DSP. We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the superiority of OOD-GraphLLM over state-of-the-art baselines under various O.O.D. settings. The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

Xin Wang et al.

· We are the first to study the problem of out-of-distribution generalized drug synergy prediction (O.O.D. generalized DSP) by resorting to graph large language models, to the best of our knowledge.
· We propose OOD-GraphLLM, a novel graphLLM framework for accurate O.O.D. generalized DSP, which jointly optimizes our proposed four components, i.e., (1) target-adaptive disentangled molecular graph encoding, (2) pairwise attentive graph architecture search, (3) multi-level contextualized cellular feature alignment and (4) finetuned biomedical LLM DrugSyn-LLM with retrieval-augmented instruction tuning, within a unified framework.
· We conduct extensive experiments under multiple O.O.D. evaluation settings to demonstrate that the proposed OOD-GraphLLM is able to consistently outperform state-of-the-art baselines, highlighting its superior generalization ability and prediction accuracy under molecular topological distribution shifts.

In-Distribution (I.D.)

Out-Of-Distribution (O.O.D.)

TCS 401

Fingolimod

Colchicine Mitomycin C

(a) O.O.D. generalized
DSP

Topological

Shift

O=C1C=CC(=O)C2= O=c1cccc2c(c1)CCC

problem

c1cc2c(s1)CNCC

c1ccccc1

Training on Existing Drugs

C1CC1C3NC3CN21

c1ccccc1-2

Prediction for New Drugs

Ring Count, Bertz Complexity Index 

Knowledge Retrieval

DrugSyn-LLM

Fixed Neural Architecture

Contextualized Embedding
Adaptive Neural Architecture

Handcrafted Features

Cell

New

Line

Drugs

(b) Current methods

Target-Adaptive Disentangled Features

Cell Line

Target

New Drugs

V.S

(c) OOD-GraphLLM

Figure 1: Comparisons between current methods (b) and OODGraphLLM (c) under O.O.D. generalized DSP (a) settings.

2 Related Works
Drug Synergy Prediction (DSP). Deep learning-based models have been widely adopted for drug synergy prediction due to their ability to model complex drug­drug and drug­cell interactions. Early methods, such as DeepSynergy [31], MatchMaker [20], and TreeCombo [15], mainly used molecular descriptors and cellline gene expression profiles with deep neural networks or gradient boosting models. With the development of graph neural networks (GNNs), methods such as DeepDDS [37], DDoS [32], and GAECDS [22] represented drugs as molecular graphs to capture atom-level structural information. Meanwhile, DFFNDDS [41] exploited pretrained language models such as BERT [4] to extract semantic representations from SMILES strings, while DTSyn [11] and AttenSyn [38] further introduced attention-based Transformer architectures for drug­drug and drug­cell interaction modeling. More recently, BAITSAO [29] has explored large language models as predictors for drug synergy tasks. Despite these advances, most existing methods are developed under the in-distribution assumption and are rarely designed for O.O.D. generalization, leaving the

