First Principles and Machine Learning Identify Key Pairing
Strength Factors of Cuprate Superconductors
Xinyu He1, Ning Chen1, Jingpei Chen1, Xuezhou Wang1*, Yang Li2* 1School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China 2 Department of Engineering Science and MaterialsUniversity of Puerto RicoMayaguezPuerto Rico 00681-9000USA *Corresponding authornchen@sina.com yang.li@upr.edu
Abstract
By using band structure calculations of quantum mechanical theory, some important peaks of DoS (Density of States) were obtained and classified based on crystal structure laws of cuprate superconductivity. In particular, the orbital interactions of the in-plane and out-of-plane ions of the copper-oxygen plane were investigated. The position, half-width, and height of DOS peak features were collected for all 35 typical curate systems which have critical temperature maximum data from the works of literature. By training test of 7 common machine learning algorithms, the relationship between the Tc maximum values and these orbital interaction parameters were mined. It was found that the key features of the orbital interaction affecting the Tc maximum were not only the flat band but also a new interaction between core orbitals in a deeper energy band position.

Introduction
The electron pairing mechanism of high-temperature superconductivity has been one of the most challenges of condensed matter physics for almost four decays1 as a result of a number of complex and deeply hidden factors influencing on the critical temperature (Tc) of superconductivity, where Tc represents the stiffness of superconductivity which combines with both electronic pairing factors and carrier concentration or doping factors 2. By means of experimental studies on Tc variations with environment, composition and structure of materials, these above two kinds of influence factors had been found3 and some complex relationships were also understood through machine learning (ML) studied on a large data of 12,000 Tc values.4,5
However, the governing strength of pairing factors remains unknown because of the following two technical problems. The first one is that the Tc Raw data's weights distribute mainly on doping factors but less on pairing ones. For example, nearly 6000 experimental data of Tc values cover mainly 35 of typical systems with only one Tc maximum value for each system, or only 6% data

weight of pairing factor, so that the predicted ML model was trained out not a new system with a higher Tc maximum or a stronger pairing factor, but only a new one with suitable doping in fact. 6,7 As the Tc maximum is different in each system for a similar optimal doping of copper oxides 8, the pairing strength of one system should be replaced by its Tc maximum values for ML training test in order to search for pairing factors.
On the other hand, the second problem is that these pairing factors were mainly observed from features or attributions of atoms or ions rather than explicit orbitals or electronic interactions9. Although electronic structures could be easily obtained by the first principal approach of quantum physics, it is hard to tackle with both these doped models' complex constructions and these burden computations for thousands of doping systems. Even if this problem were solved, the limited data set problem still remains due to a much low weight ratio on the pairing factor. Therefore, changing target data set of the Tc maximum as well as training by key orbital features is the only way to solve the existing technical problems.

Method
For cuprates, there are three crystal categories: the layer structure for Hg, Tl, Pb and Bi families, the 123 structure and the 214 structure. But even for one structure, there is also a lot of complex orbital interaction features to be considered. Here we should provide a simpler method which is based on orbital peaks of interacting bands from Density-of-State (DoS) diagrams obtained by band structure calculations of First principles, in which one peak represents only one band, ignoring its orbital peaks in details. In addition, its position, half-width and height, quite different from its atomic orbital, are chosen as their peaks' features to discuss the interactions between different orbitals.
As result of lacks of Tc maximum data values, the number of influencing features for ML training had to be limited by introducing domain knowledge, so that crystal structure laws of cuprate superconducting are quite important to help us for cutting off orbital feature's candidates. In this paper, we especially analysis a relatively larger energy range of energy band to cover most of important s, p and d peaks of DoS. 10 Firstly, the copper-oxygen plane is a main superconducting "highway" for high temperature superconductivity, oxygen ion's 2p and copper ion's 3d orbitals need to be focused on, which were thought to be a common feature of cuprate superconductors. Secondly, as a difference of key crystal structure of each cuprate system mainly comes from the nearest neighboring cation beside the copper-oxygen plane,11 so that the second outer saturated orbitals of them had to be taken into account. Similar reason for the second outer saturated 2s orbital of oxygen ion since its orbital is similar in energy and space. Therefore, much deeper range of orbitals up to -30eV below Fermi level were studied in this work, which is quite different from in other works (Up to -10eV), in order to emphasize on all of these important orbital interactions around the copper-oxygen plane.

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of Key four ions and two energy-bands for the coper-oxygen plane of cuprate and the classification of some important peaks in DoS1#, 2# for neighboring cations with deeper and shallower orbital levels copared to EF respectively, 3# for copper ions and 4# for oxygen ions
Figure 1 show that a schematic diagram of some important orbitals in crystal structure, as well as their classification of orbital peaks in DoS corresponding to a typical part of cuprate crystal structure. The calculation procedure and parameters are detailed in reference7. Especially, we focused on 1#~4# four types of ions in the near-neighbor position outside the plane (1# Ions occupies a relatively lower p orbital quite far away from Fermi level, and 2# Ions occupies for a relatively higher one close to Fermi level) and in the copper-oxygen plane (3# is Cooper Ions and 4# is Oxygen Ions). Here, the ionic classification is defined for the propose of studying the interaction between some important orbitals in two energy-bands, in which it is believed that the electron orbit interaction in more detail contrary to a strength and a type of chemical bond. Therefore, total four key ions coupled with two different energy-bands composed of those 8 important peaks selected from DoS of the first principal calculations, therefore, there are total 21 basic features (position, half-width and height) of orbital peak collected for ML training. Actually, it should be noticed that the most important selection principle come from not only basic

