DIRECTIONAL GRAPH NETWORKS

ANISOTROPIC AGGREGATION IN GRAPH NEURAL NETWORKS VIA DIRECTIONAL VECTOR FIELDS

Dominique Beaini Valence Discovery Montreal, QC, Canada dominique@valencediscovery.com

Saro Passaro University of Cambridge Cambridge, United Kingdom sp976@cam.ac.uk

Vincent Létourneau Valence Discovery
Montreal, QC, Canada

William L. Hamilton McGill University, MILA
Montreal, QC, Canada

Gabriele Corso University of Cambridge Cambridge, United Kingdom

Pietro Liò University of Cambridge Cambridge, United Kingdom

arXiv:2010.02863v4 [cs.LG] 7 Apr 2021

ABSTRACT
The lack of anisotropic kernels in graph neural networks (GNNs) strongly limits their expressiveness, contributing to well-known issues such as over-smoothing. To overcome this limitation, we propose the first globally consistent anisotropic kernels for GNNs, allowing for graph convolutions that are defined according to topologicaly-derived directional flows. First, by defining a vector field in the graph, we develop a method of applying directional derivatives and smoothing by projecting node-specific messages into the field. Then, we propose the use of the Laplacian eigenvectors as such vector field. We show that the method generalizes CNNs on an n-dimensional grid and is provably more discriminative than standard GNNs regarding the Weisfeiler-Lehman 1-WL test. We evaluate our method on different standard benchmarks and see a relative error reduction of 8% on the CIFAR10 graph dataset and 11% to 32% on the molecular ZINC dataset, and a relative increase in precision of 1.6% on the MolPCBA dataset. An important outcome of this work is that it enables graph networks to embed directions in an unsupervised way, thus allowing a better representation of the anisotropic features in different physical or biological problems.
1 Introduction
One of the most important distinctions between convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and graph neural networks (GNNs) is that CNNs allow for any convolutional kernel, while most GNN methods are limited to symmetric kernels (also called isotropic kernels) [25, 14]. There are some implementations of asymmetric kernels using gated mechanisms [4, 43], motif attention [38], edge features [14], port numbering [41] or the 3D structure of molecules [26].
However, to the best of our knowledge, there are currently no methods that allow asymmetric graph kernels that are dependent on the full graph structure or directional flows. They either depend on local structures or local features. This is in opposition to images, which exhibit canonical directions: the horizontal and vertical axes. The absence of an analogous concept in graphs makes it difficult to define directional message passing and to produce an analogue of the directional frequency filters (or Gabor filters) widely present in image processing [37]. In fact, there is numerous evidence that directional filtering is fundamental image processing [24, 2, 47].
We propose a novel idea for GNNs: use vector fields in the graph to define directions for the propagation of information. An overview of this framework is presented in figure 1. Using this approach, the usual message-passing structure of a GNN is projected onto globally-defined directions so that the contribution of each neighbouring node nv is weighted by its alignment with the vector fields at the receiving node nu. This enables our method to propagate information via directional derivatives or smoothing of the features.
In order to define globally consistent directional fields over general graphs, we propose to use the gradients of the low-frequency eigenvectors k of the graph Laplacian, since they are known to capture key information about the global
equal contribution

Directional Graph Networks

A PREPRINT

(a) Input graph
The a-directional adjacency matrix is given as an input. We then compute the Laplacian matrix
. : number of nodes : number of edges
Graph

Pre-computed steps

Graph neural network steps

Compute the first

Compute the

(b)

(c)

eigenvectors

gradient

Create the aggregation (d)
matrices

(e) Input graph (f) Feature aggregation

The eigenvectors of are computed and sorted such that has the lowest nonzero eigenvalue and has the -th lowest.

We compute the -first

eigenvectors with a

complexity of

.

Node colormap

-max

0

max

The gradient of is a function of the edges (a matrix) such that  = - if the nodes , are connected, or  = 0 otherwise.

If the graph has a known direction, it can be encoded as field .

Field matrix colormap

-max

0

max

Each row , : of the field is normalized by it's norm.

,: =

,:
.: +

· is the directional smoothing matrix.

=

· is the directional derivative matrix.

,: = ,: - diag

:, ,:

A graph with the node features is given. is the feature matrix of the graph at the 0th GNN layer, of size
×.

The aggregation

matrices

,..., ,

are

taken from the pre-

computed steps.

= =

, ,
, ,
, ,
, ,
, ,
, ,

The aggregation matrices

,..., ,

are used to aggregate

the features via the

matrix prodict . For we

take the absolute value due to

the sign ambiguity of .

is the columnconcatenation of all directional and a-directional aggregations.

The complexity is

, or

if the aggregations are

parallelized.

+

(g)

MLP

This is the only step with learned parameters.

Based on the GCN method, each aggregation is followed by a multi layer perceptron (MLP) on all the features.

The MLP is applied on the

columns of , thus we

have a complexity of

.

· has columns

· has 2 + 1 columns

· has columns

= =

= concat 


= MLP
Next GNN layer
 +1   

Figure 1: Overview of the steps required to aggregate messages in the direction of the eigenvectors.

structure of graphs [6, 8, 16]. In particular, these eigenvectors can be used to define optimal partitions of the nodes in a graph, to give a natural ordering [32], and to find the dominant directions of the graph diffusion process [7, 40]. Further, we show that they generalize the horizontal and vertical directional flows in a grid (see figure 2), allowing them to guide the aggregation and mimic the asymmetric and directional kernels present in computer vision. In fact, we demonstrate mathematically that our work generalizes CNNs, by reproducing all convolutional kernels of radius R in an n-dimensional grid, while also bringing the powerful data augmentation capabilities of reflection, rotation or distortion of the directions. Additionally, we also prove that our directional graph networks (DGNs) are more discriminative than standard GNNs in regards to the Weisfeiler-Lehman 1-WL test, confirming an increase of expressiveness.
We further show that our DGN model theoretically and empirically allows for efficient message passing across distant communities, which counteracts the well-known problem of over-smoothing in GNNs. Alternative methods reduce the impact of over-smoothing by using skip connections [33], global pooling [1], or randomly dropping edges during training time [39], but without solving the underlying problem.
Our method distinguishes itself from other spectral GNNs since the literature usually uses the low frequencies to estimate local Fourier transforms in the graph [31, 44]. Instead, we do not try to approximate the Fourier transform, but only to define a directional flow at each node and guide the aggregation.
We tested our method on 5 standard datasets from [12] and [20], using two types of architectures, and either using or ignoring edge features. In all cases, we observed state-of-the-art results from the proposed DGN, with relative improvements of 8% on CIFAR10, 11-32% on ZINC, 0.8% on MolHIV and 1.6% on MolPCBA. Most of the improvement is attributed to the directional derivative aggregator, highlighting our method's ability of capturing directional high-frequency signals in graphs.
2 Theoretical development
2.1 Intuitive overview
One of the biggest limitations of current GNN methods compared to CNNs is the inability to do message passing in a specific direction such as the horizontal one in a grid graph. In fact, it is difficult to define directions or coordinates based solely on the shape of the graph.
The lack of directions strongly limits the discriminative abilities of GNNs to understand local structures and simple feature transformations. Most GNNs are invariant to the permutation of the neighbours' features, so the nodes' received signal is not influenced by swapping the features of two neighbours. Therefore, several layers in a deep network will be
2

