A Generalization of Transformer Networks to Graphs
Vijay Prakash Dwivedi,¶ Xavier Bresson¶
¶ School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore vijaypra001@e.ntu.edu.sg, xbresson@ntu.edu.sg

arXiv:2012.09699v2 [cs.LG] 24 Jan 2021

Abstract
We propose a generalization of transformer neural network architecture for arbitrary graphs. The original transformer was designed for Natural Language Processing (NLP), which operates on fully connected graphs representing all connections between the words in a sequence. Such architecture does not leverage the graph connectivity inductive bias, and can perform poorly when the graph topology is important and has not been encoded into the node features. We introduce a graph transformer with four new properties compared to the standard model. First, the attention mechanism is a function of the neighborhood connectivity for each node in the graph. Second, the positional encoding is represented by the Laplacian eigenvectors, which naturally generalize the sinusoidal positional encodings often used in NLP. Third, the layer normalization is replaced by a batch normalization layer, which provides faster training and better generalization performance. Finally, the architecture is extended to edge feature representation, which can be critical to tasks s.a. chemistry (bond type) or link prediction (entity relationship in knowledge graphs). Numerical experiments on a graph benchmark demonstrate the performance of the proposed graph transformer architecture. This work closes the gap between the original transformer, which was designed for the limited case of line graphs, and graph neural networks, that can work with arbitrary graphs. As our architecture is simple and generic, we believe it can be used as a black box for future applications that wish to consider transformer and graphs.1
1 Introduction
There has been a tremendous success in the field of natural language processing (NLP) since the development of Transformers (Vaswani et al. 2017) which are currently the best performing neural network architectures for handling long-term sequential datasets such as sentences in NLP. This is achieved by the use of attention mechanism (Bahdanau, Cho, and Bengio 2014) where a word in a sentence attends to each other word and combines the received information to generate its abstract feature representations. From a perspective of message-passing paradigm (Gilmer
AAAI'21 Workshop on Deep Learning on Graphs: Methods and Applications (DLG-AAAI'21). Copyright © 2021, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
1https://github.com/graphdeeplearning/graphtransformer.

et al. 2017) in graph neural networks (GNNs), this process of learning word feature representations by combining feature information from other words in a sentence can alternatively be viewed as a case of a GNN applied on a fully connected graph of words (Joshi 2020). Transformers based models have led to state-of-the-art performance on several NLP applications (Devlin et al. 2018; Radford et al. 2018; Brown et al. 2020). On the other hand, graph neural networks (GNNs) are shown to be the most effective neural network architectures on graph datasets and have achieved significant success on a wide range of applications, such as in knowledge graphs (Schlichtkrull et al. 2018; Chami et al. 2020), in social sciences (Monti et al. 2019), in physics (Cranmer et al. 2019; Sanchez-Gonzalez et al. 2020), etc. In particular, GNNs exploit the given arbitrary graph structure while learning the feature representations for nodes and edges and eventually the learned representations are used for downstream tasks. In this work, we explore inductive biases at the convergence of these two active research areas in deep learning towards presenting an improved version of Graph Transformer (see Figure 1) which extends the key design components of the NLP transformers to arbitrary graphs.
1.1 Related Work
As a preliminary, we highlight the most recent research works which attempt to develop graph transformers (Li et al. 2019; Nguyen, Nguyen, and Phung 2019; Zhang et al. 2020) with few focused on specialized cases such as on heterogeneous graphs, temporal networks, generative modeling, etc. (Yun et al. 2019; Xu, Joshi, and Bresson 2019; Hu et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2020).
The model proposed in Li et al. (2019) employs attention to all graph nodes instead of a node's local neighbors for the purpose of capturing global information. This limits the efficient exploitation of sparsity which we show is a good inductive bias for learning on graph datasets. For the purpose of global information, we argue that there are other ways to incorporate the same instead of letting go sparsity and local contexts. For example, the use of graph-specific positional features (Zhang et al. 2020), or node Laplacian position eigenvectors (Belkin and Niyogi 2003; Dwivedi et al. 2020), or relative learnable positional information (You, Ying, and Leskovec 2019), virtual nodes (Li et al. 2015), etc. Zhang et al. (2020) propose Graph-BERT with an emphasis on pre-

Add&Norm Add&Norm

Add&Norm Add&Norm

Add&Norm Add&Norm

+

+

+

+

Graph Transformer Layer

Laplacian EigVecs as Positional Encoding

Graph Transformer Layer with edge features

Figure 1: Block Diagram of Graph Transformer with Laplacian Eigvectors () used as positional encoding (LapPE). LapPE is added to input node embeddings before passing the features to the first layer. Left: Graph Transformer operating on node embeddings only to compute attention scores; Right: Graph Transformer with edge features with designated feature pipeline to maintain layer wise edge representations. In this extension, the available edge attributes in a graph is used to explicitly modify the corresponding pairwise attention scores.

training and parallelized learning using a subgraph batching scheme that creates fixed-size linkless subgraphs to be passed to the model instead of the original graph. GraphBERT employs a combination of several positional encoding schemes to capture absolute node structural and relative node positional information. Since the original graph is not used directly in Graph-BERT and the subgraphs do not have edges between the nodes (i.e., linkless), the proposed combination of positional encodings attempts at retaining the original graph structure information in the nodes. We perform detailed analysis of Graph-BERT positional encoding schemes, along with experimental comparison with the model we present in this paper in Section 4.1.
Yun et al. (2019) developed Graph Transformer Networks (GTN) to learn on heterogeneous graphs with a target to transform a given heterogeneous graph into a meta-path based graph and then perform convolution. Notably, their focus behind the use of attention framework is for inter-

preting the generated meta-paths. There is another transformer based approach developed for heterogeneous information networks, namely Heterogeneous Graph Transformer (HGT) by Hu et al. (2020). Apart from its ability of handling arbitrary number of node and edge types, HGT also captures the dynamics of information flow in the heterogeneous graphs in the form of relative temporal positional encoding which is based on the timestamp differences of the central node and the message-passing nodes. Furthermore, Zhou et al. (2020) proposed a transformer based generative model which generates temporal graphs by directly learning from dynamic information in networks. The architecture presented in Nguyen, Nguyen, and Phung (2019) somewhat proceeds along our goal to develop graph transformer for arbitrary homogeneous graphs with a coordinate embedding based positional encoding scheme. However, their experiments show that the coordinate embeddings are not universal in performance and only helps in a couple of unsupervised

