Self-Attention Graph Pooling

arXiv:1904.08082v4 [cs.LG] 13 Jun 2019

Junhyun Lee * 1 Inyeop Lee * 1 Jaewoo Kang 1

Abstract
Advanced methods of applying deep learning to structured data such as graphs have been proposed in recent years. In particular, studies have focused on generalizing convolutional neural networks to graph data, which includes redefining the convolution and the downsampling (pooling) operations for graphs. The method of generalizing the convolution operation to graphs has been proven to improve performance and is widely used. However, the method of applying downsampling to graphs is still difficult to perform and has room for improvement. In this paper, we propose a graph pooling method based on selfattention. Self-attention using graph convolution allows our pooling method to consider both node features and graph topology. To ensure a fair comparison, the same training procedures and model architectures were used for the existing pooling methods and our method. The experimental results demonstrate that our method achieves superior graph classification performance on the benchmark datasets using a reasonable number of parameters.
1. Introduction
The advent of deep learning has led to extensive improvements in technology used to recognize and utilize patterns in data (LeCun et al., 2015). In particular, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) successfully leverage the properties of data such as images, speech, and video on Euclidean domains (grid structure) (Hinton et al., 2012; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; He et al., 2016; Karpathy et al., 2014). CNNs consist of convolutional layers and downsampling (pooling) layers. The convolutional and pooling layers exploit the shift-invariance (also known as stationary) property and
*Equal contribution. The order of authors was determined randomly. 1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea. Correspondence to: Jaewoo Kang <kangj@korea.ac.kr>.
Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Long Beach, California, PMLR 97, 2019. Copyright 2019 by the author(s).

compositionality of grid-structured data (Simoncelli & Olshausen, 2001; Bronstein et al., 2017). As a result, CNNs perform well with a small number of parameters.
In various fields, however, a large amount of data, such as graphs, exists on the non-Euclidean domain. For example, social networks, biological networks, and molecular structures can be represented by nodes and edges of graphs (Lazer et al., 2009; Davidson et al., 2002; Duvenaud et al., 2015). Therefore, attempts have been made to successfully use CNNs in the non-Euclidean domain. Most previous studies have redefined the convolution and pooling layers to process graph data.
To define graph convolution, studies have used the spectral (Bruna et al., 2014; Henaff et al., 2015; Defferrard et al., 2016; Kipf & Welling, 2016) and non-spectral (Monti et al., 2017; Hamilton et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2018a; Velikovi et al., 2018; Morris et al., 2018) methods. The application of graph convolution has resulted in outstanding performance in a variety of fields which include recommender systems (van den Berg et al., 2017; Yao & Li, 2018; Monti et al., 2017), chemical researches (You et al., 2018; Zitnik et al., 2018), natural language processing (Bastings et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2018; Yao et al., 2018), and in many tasks as reported in Zhou et al..
There are fewer methods for graph pooling than for graph convolution. Previous researches have adopted the pooling method that considers only graph topology (Defferrard et al., 2016; Rhee et al., 2018). With growing interest in graph pooling, several improved methods have been proposed (Dai et al., 2016; Duvenaud et al., 2015; Gilmer et al., 2017b; Zhang et al., 2018b). They utilize node features to obtain a smaller graph representation. Recently, Ying et al.; Gao & Ji; Cangea et al. have proposed innovative pooling methods that can learn hierarchical representations of graphs. These methods allow Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to attain scaled-down graphs after pooling in an end-to-end fashion.
However, the above pooling methods have room for improvement. For example, the differentiable hierarchical pooling method of Ying et al. has a quadratic storage complexity and the number of its parameters is dependent on the number of nodes. Gao & Ji; Cangea et al. have addressed the complexity issue, but their method does not take graph topology into account.

Self-Attention Graph Pooling

Here, we propose SAGPool which is a Self-Attention Graph Pooling method for GNNs in the context of hierarchical graph pooling. Our method can learn hierarchical representations in an end-to-end fashion using relatively few parameters. The self-attention mechanism is exploited to distinguish between the nodes that should be dropped and the nodes that should be retained. Due to the self-attention mechanism which uses graph convolution to calculate attention scores, node features and graph topology are considered. In short, SAGPool, which has the advantages of the previous methods, is the first method to use self-attention for graph pooling and achieve high performance. The code is available on Github 1
2. Related Work
GNNs have drawn considerable attention due to their stateof-the-art performance on tasks in the graph domain. Studies on GNNs focus on extending the convolution and pooling operation, which are the main components of CNN, to graphs.
2.1. Graph Convolution
Convolution operation on graphs can be defined in either the spectral or non-spectral domain. Spectral approaches focus on redefining the convolution operation in the Fourier domain, utilizing spectral filters that use the graph Laplacian. Kipf & Welling proposed a layer-wise propagation rule that simplifies the approximation of the graph Laplacian using the Chebyshev expansion method (Defferrard et al., 2016). The goal of non-spectral approaches is to define the convolution operation so that it works directly on graphs. In general non-spectral approaches, the central node aggregates features from adjacent nodes when its features are passed to the next layer rather than defining the convolution operation in the Fourier domain. Hamilton et al. proposed GraphSAGE which learns node embeddings through sampling and aggregation. While GraphSAGE operates in a fixed-size neighborhood, Graph Attention Network (GAT) (Velikovi et al., 2018), based on attention mechanisms (Bahdanau et al., 2014), computes node representations in entire neighborhoods. Both approaches have improved performance on graph-related tasks.
2.2. Graph Pooling
Pooling layers enable CNN models to reduce the number of parameters by scaling down the size of representations, and thus avoid overfitting. To generalize CNNs, the pooling method for GNNs is necessary. Graph pooling methods can be grouped into the following three categories: topology based, global, and hierarchical pooling.
1https://github.com/inyeoplee77/SAGPool

Topology based pooling Earlier works used graph coarsening algorithms rather than neural networks. Spectral clustering algorithms use eigendecomposition to obtain coarsened graphs. However, alternatives were needed due to the time complexity of eigendecomposition. Graclus(Dhillon et al., 2007) computes clustered versions of given graphs without eigenvectors because of the mathematical equivalence between a general spectral clustering objective and a weighted kernel k-means objective. Even in recent GNN models (Defferrard et al., 2016; Rhee et al., 2018), Graclus is employed as a pooling module.

Global pooling Unlike the previous methods, global pooling methods consider graph features. Global pooling methods use summation or neural networks to pool all the representations of nodes in each layer. Graphs with different structures can be processed because global pooling methods collect all the representations. Gilmer et al. viewed GNNs as message passing schemes, and proposed a general framework for graph classification where entire graph representations could be obtained by utilizing the Set2Set(Vinyals et al., 2015) method. SortPool(Zhang et al., 2018b) sorts embeddings for nodes according to the structural roles of a graph and feeds the sorted embeddings to the next layers.

Hierarchical pooling Global pooling methods do not learn hierarchical representations which are crucial for capturing structural information of graphs. The main motivation of hierarchical pooling methods is to build a model that can learn feature- or topology-based node assignments in each layer. Ying et al. proposed DiffPool which is a differentiable graph pooling method that can learn assignment matrices in an end-to-end fashion. A learned assignment matrix in layer l, S(l)  Rnl×nl+1 contains the probability values of nodes in layer l being assigned to clusters in the next layer l + 1. Here, nl denotes the number of nodes in layer l. Specifically, nodes are assigned by the following equation:

S(l) = softmax(GNNl(A(l), X(l)))

A(l+1) = S(l) A(l)S(l)

(1)

where X denotes the node feature matrix and A is the adjacency matrix.

Cangea et al. utilized gPool(Gao & Ji, 2019) and achieved performance comparable to that of DiffPool. gPool requires a storage complexity of O(|V | + |E|) whereas DiffPool requires O(k|V |2) where V , E, and k denote vertices, edges, and pooling ratio, respectively. gPool uses a learnable vector p to calculate projection scores, and then uses the scores to select the top ranked nodes. Projection scores are obtained by the dot product between p and the features of all the nodes. The scores indicate the amount of information of nodes that can be retained. The following equation roughly describes the pooling procedure in gPool.
y = X(l)p(l)/ p(l) , idx = top-rank(y, kN )

