arXiv:2210.13627v2 [cond-mat.stat-mech] 11 Apr 2023

Integrable heat conduction model
Chiara Franceschini, Rouven Frassek, Cristian Giardinà
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Department of Mathematics,
Via G. Campi 213/b, 41125 Modena, Italy
Abstract We consider a stochastic process of heat conduction where energy is redistributed along a chain between nearest neighbor sites via an improper beta distribution. Similar to the well-known KipnisMarchioro-Presutti (KMP) model, the finite chain is coupled at its ends with two reservoirs that break the conservation of energy when working at different temperatures. At variance with KMP, the model considered here is integrable and one can write in a closed form the n-point correlation functions of the non-equilibrium steady state. As a consequence of the exact solution one can directly prove that the system is in a `local equilibrium' and described at the macro-scale by a product measure. Integrability manifests itself through the description of the model via the open Heisenberg chain with non-compact spins. The algebraic formulation of the model allows to interpret its duality relation with a purely absorbing particle system as a change of representation.

1 Introduction
In their paper from 1982 [1], Kipnis, Marchioro and Presutti (KMP) introduced a solvable model of heat conduction. They considered a chain of energy-exchanging harmonic oscillators, that is coupled to Gibbs reservoirs of different temperatures at the two ends of the chain. They successfully implemented the idea of modelling the non-harmonic effects by a stochastic process which redistributes `microcanonically' the energy between nearest-neighbor oscillators, i.e. keeping constant their total energy. The pioneering idea behind the KMP model was substantially expanded in several later works and found applications in different contexts such as fluctuations and large deviations of the temperature profile and of the current [2, 3, 4, 5], dynamical phase transitions [6], anomalous heat conduction of momentum conserving systems [7, 8, 9, 10], duality theory of Markov processes and hidden symmetries [11, 12].
The KMP model was thus the first mathematical model of energy-transport where it was possible to rigorously prove that the non-equilibrium steady state has the local equilibrium property and furthermore Fourier's law with a constant conductivity holds. The main reason behind the solvability of the KMP process is "duality", i.e. the existence of an associated dual process that is simpler to study. By duality, the computation of the n-point correlations functions in the non-equilibrium steady state is reduced to the problem of the exit distribution of n dual particles. Propagation of chaos and local equilibrium were then obtained by showing that, in the macroscopic limit, the dual particles essentially behave like independent particles [1].
However, the full microscopic description of the non-equilibrium stationary state remained inaccessible in the KMP model, as the absorption probabilities of the dual particles have not been computed in closed-form. In this paper we consider an energy-redistribution model which, while being similar to the one of KMP, allows a full description at microscopic level of the non-equilibrium steady state. More precisely, for the integrable heat conduction model considered in this paper we compute all the multivariate moments of the stationary measure (non-equilibrium steady state). From the exact solution we establish that when the reservoir parameters are equal (equilibrium) we have a Gibbs measure corresponding to a product of Gamma distributions. If instead the reservoir parameters are different (non-equilibrium) we find long-range correlations. Local equilibrium, i.e. a product measure around each macroscopic point with inhomogeneous parameters interpolating between the reservoir parameters, is then recovered as a consequence of the exact solution.
The closed form expression for the multivariate moments paves the way to the rigorous study of density fluctuations (both typical fluctuations as well as large deviations) for non-equilibrium steady states [13], with the possibility of a direct comparison to the predictions of the Macroscopic Fluctuation Theory (MFT) [5] developed for boundary driven diffusive systems.
Added note. In the progress of this work, we became aware of the interesting article [14] that relates to the model studied in this paper. More precisely, the authors considered the most general model of energy redistribution with a redistribution rule that is of "zero-range" type, namely the rate at which the energy is moved between two sites is just a function of the energy at the site where it is taken off. Remarkably, within this large class of models, the authors show that the model with generator (2.2) studied in this paper, as well as the model with generator (2.13) studied in [15, 16], emerge as the only two models of "zero-range" type where the following three properties are fullfilled: i) they are of gradient type; ii) they have a product measure at equilibrium; iii) they have constant diffusivity and quadratic mobility, which in turn guarantees the possibility of computing large deviation functions using the approach of Macroscopic Fluctuation Theory [5]. Thus, within the class of "zero-range"
2

