arXiv:2006.09252v3 [cs.LG] 5 Jul 2021

Improving Graph Neural Network Expressivity via Subgraph Isomorphism Counting
Giorgos Bouritsas1, Fabrizio Frasca1,2, Stefanos Zafeiriou 1, and Michael M. Bronstein§1,2
1Imperial College London, UK 2Twitter, UK
Abstract
While Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have achieved remarkable results in a variety of applications, recent studies exposed important shortcomings in their ability to capture the structure of the underlying graph. It has been shown that the expressive power of standard GNNs is bounded by the WeisfeilerLeman (WL) graph isomorphism test, from which they inherit proven limitations such as the inability to detect and count graph substructures. On the other hand, there is significant empirical evidence, e.g. in network science and bioinformatics, that substructures are often intimately related to downstream tasks. To this end, we propose "Graph Substructure Networks" (GSN), a topologically-aware message passing scheme based on substructure encoding. We theoretically analyse the expressive power of our architecture, showing that it is strictly more expressive than the WL test, and provide sufficient conditions for universality. Importantly, we do not attempt to adhere to the WL hierarchy; this allows us to retain multiple attractive properties of standard GNNs such as locality and linear network complexity, while being able to disambiguate even hard instances of graph isomorphism. We perform an extensive experimental evaluation on graph classification and regression tasks and obtain state-of-the-art results in diverse realworld settings including molecular graphs and social networks. The code is publicly available at https: //github.com/gbouritsas/graph-substructure-networks.
1 Introduction
The field of graph representation learning has undergone a rapid growth in the past few years. In particular, Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), a family of neural architectures designed for irregularly structured data, have been successfully applied to problems ranging from social networks and recommender systems [1] to bioinformatics [2, 3], chemistry [4, 5, 6] and physics [7, 8], to name a few. Most GNN architectures are based on message passing [5], where the representation of each node is iteratively updated by aggregating information from its neighbours.
A crucial difference from traditional neural networks operating on grid-structured data is the absence of canonical ordering of the nodes in a graph. To address this, the aggregation function is constructed to be invariant to neighbourhood permutations and, as a consequence, to graph isomorphism. This kind of symmetry is not always desirable and thus different inductive biases that disambiguate the neighbours have been proposed. For instance, in geometric graphs, such as 3D molecular graphs and meshes, directional biases are usually employed in order to model the positional information of the nodes [9, 10, 11, 12, 13]; for proteins, ordering information is used to disambiguate amino-acids at different positions in the sequence [14]; in multi-relational knowledge graphs, a different aggregation is performed for each relation type [15].
g.bouritsas@imperial.ac.uk ffrasca@twitter.com s.zafeiriou@imperial.ac.uk §mbronstein@twitter.com
1

The structure of the graph itself does not usually explicitly take part in the aggregation function. In fact, most models rely on multiple message passing steps as a means for each node to discover the global structure of the graph. However, since message-passing GNNs are at most as powerful as the Weisfeiler Leman test (WL) [16, 17], they are limited in their abilities to adequately exploit the graph structure, e.g. by counting substructures [18, 19]. This uncovers a crucial limitation of GNNs, as substructures have been widely recognised as important in the study of complex networks. For example, in molecular chemistry, functional groups and rings are related to a plethora of chemical properties, while cliques are related to protein complexes in Protein-Protein Interaction networks and community structure in social networks, respectively [20, 21].
Therefore, three major questions arise when designing GNN architectures: (a) How to go beyond isotropic, i.e., locally symmetric, aggregation functions ? (b) How to ensure that GNNs are aware of the structural chatacteristics of the graph? (c) How to achieve the above two without sacrificing invariance to isomorphism and hence the ability of GNNs to generalise?
In this work we attempt to simultaneously provide an answer to the above. We propose to break local symmetries by introducing structural information in the aggregation function, hence addressing (a) and (b). In particular, the contribution of each neighbour (message) is transformed differently depending on its structural relationship with the central node. This relationship is expressed by counting the appearance of certain substructures. Since substructure counts are vertex invariants, i.e. they are invariant to vertex permutations, it is easy to see that the resulting GNN will be invariant to isomorphism, hence also addressing (c). Moreover, by choosing the substructures, one can provide the model with different inductive biases, based on the graph distribution at hand.
We characterise the expressivity of our message-passing scheme, coined as Graph Substructure Network (GSN), showing that GSN is strictly more expressive than traditional GNNs for the vast majority of substructures, while retaining the locality of message passing, as opposed to higher-order methods [22, 23, 24, 17] that follow the WL hierarchy (see Section 2). In the limit, our model can yield a unique representation for every isomorphism class and is thus universal. We provide an extensive experimental evaluation on hard instances of graph isomorphism testing (strongly regular graphs), as well as on real-world networks from the social and biological domains, including the recently introduced large-scale benchmarks [25, 26]. We observe that when choosing the structural inductive biases based on domain-specific knowledge, GSN achieves state-of-the-art results.
2 Preliminaries
Let G = (VG, EG) be a graph with vertex set VG and edge set EG, directed or undirected. A subgraph GS = (VGS , EGS ) of G is any graph with VGS  VG, EGS  EG. When EGS includes all the edges of G with endpoints in VGS , i.e., EGS = EG  VGS × VGS , the subgraph is said to be induced.
2.1 Isomorphism & Automoprhism
Two graphs G, H are isomorphic (denoted H G), if there exists an adjacency-preserving bijective mapping (isomorphism) f : VG  VH , i.e., (v, u)  EG iff (f (v), f (u))  EH . Given some small graph H, the subgraph isomorphism problem amounts to finding a subgraph GS of G such that GS H. An automorphism of H is an isomorphism that maps H onto itself. The set of all the unique automorphisms forms the automorphism group of the graph, denoted as Aut(H), which contains all the possible symmetries of the graph.
The automorphism group yields a partition of the vertices into disjoint subsets of VH called orbits. Intuitively, this concept allows us to group the vertices based on their structural roles, e.g. the endpoint vertices of a path, or all the vertices of a cycle (see Figure 1). Formally, the orbit of a vertex v  VH is the set of vertices to which it can be mapped via an automorphism: Orb(v) = {u  VH | g  Aut(H) s.t. g(u) = v}, and the set of all orbits H \ Aut(H) = {Orb(v) | v  VH } is usually called the quotient of the automorphism when it acts on the graph H. We are interested in the unique elements of this set that we will denote as {OHV ,1, OHV ,2, . . . , OHV ,dH }, where dH is the cardinality of the quotient.
2

