Structure-Aware Transformer for Graph Representation Learning

arXiv:2202.03036v3 [stat.ML] 13 Jun 2022

Dexiong Chen * 1 2 Leslie O'Bray * 1 2 Karsten Borgwardt 1 2

Abstract
The Transformer architecture has gained growing attention in graph representation learning recently, as it naturally overcomes several limitations of graph neural networks (GNNs) by avoiding their strict structural inductive biases and instead only encoding the graph structure via positional encoding. Here, we show that the node representations generated by the Transformer with positional encoding do not necessarily capture structural similarity between them. To address this issue, we propose the Structure-Aware Transformer, a class of simple and flexible graph Transformers built upon a new self-attention mechanism. This new self-attention incorporates structural information into the original self-attention by extracting a subgraph representation rooted at each node before computing the attention. We propose several methods for automatically generating the subgraph representation and show theoretically that the resulting representations are at least as expressive as the subgraph representations. Empirically, our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on five graph prediction benchmarks. Our structure-aware framework can leverage any existing GNN to extract the subgraph representation, and we show that it systematically improves performance relative to the base GNN model, successfully combining the advantages of GNNs and Transformers. Our code is available at https: //github.com/BorgwardtLab/SAT.
1. Introduction
Graph neural networks (GNNs) have been established as powerful and flexible tools for graph representation learning,
*Equal contribution 1Department of Biosystems Science and Engineering, ETH Zu¨rich, Switzerland 2SIB Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Switzerland. Correspondence to: Dexiong Chen <dexiong.chen@bsse.ethz.ch>, Leslie O'Bray <leslie.obray@bsse.ethz.ch>.
Proceedings of the 39 th International Conference on Machine Learning, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, PMLR 162, 2022. Copyright 2022 by the author(s).

with successful applications in drug discovery (Gaudelet et al., 2021), protein design (Ingraham et al., 2019), social network analysis (Fan et al., 2019), and so on. A large class of GNNs build multilayer models, where each layer operates on the previous layer to generate new representations using a message-passing mechanism (Gilmer et al., 2017) to aggregate local neighborhood information.
While many different message-passing strategies have been proposed, some critical limitations have been uncovered in this class of GNNs. These include the limited expressiveness of GNNs (Xu et al., 2019; Morris et al., 2019), as well as known problems such as over-smoothing (Li et al., 2018; 2019; Chen et al., 2020; Oono & Suzuki, 2020) and oversquashing (Alon & Yahav, 2021). Over-smoothing manifests as all node representations converging to a constant after sufficiently many layers, while over-squashing occurs when messages from distant nodes are not effectively propagated through certain "bottlenecks" in a graph, since too many messages get compressed into a single fixed-length vector. Designing new architectures beyond neighborhood aggregation is thus essential to solve these problems.
Transformers (Vaswani et al., 2017), which have proved to be successful in natural language understanding (Vaswani et al., 2017), computer vision (Dosovitskiy et al., 2020), and biological sequence modeling (Rives et al., 2021), offer the potential to address these issues. Rather than only aggregating local neighborhood information in the messagepassing mechanism, the Transformer architecture is able to capture interaction information between any node pair via a single self-attention layer. Moreover, in contrast to GNNs, the Transformer avoids introducing any structural inductive bias at intermediate layers, addressing the expressivity limitation of GNNs. Instead, it encodes structural or positional information about nodes only into input node features, albeit limiting how much information it can learn from the graph structure. Integrating information about the graph structure into the Transformer architecture has thus gained growing attention in the graph representation learning field. However, most existing approaches only encode positional relationships between nodes, rather than explicitly encoding the structural relationships. As a result, they may not identify structural similarities between nodes and could fail to model the structural interaction between nodes (see Figure 1). This could explain why their performance

Structure-Aware Graph Transformer

G1 u

G2 v

Figure 1: Position-aware vs. structure-aware: Using a positional encoding based on shortest paths in G1 and G2 respectively (assuming all edges have equal weight), node u and v would receive identical encodings since their shortest paths to all other nodes are the same in both graphs. However, their structures are different, with v forming a triangle with its red neighbors.
was dominated by sparse GNNs in several tasks (Dwivedi et al., 2022).
Contribution In this work, we address the critical question of how to encode structural information into a Transformer architecture. Our principal contribution is to introduce a flexible structure-aware self-attention mechanism that explicitly considers the graph structure and thus captures structural interaction between nodes. The resulting class of Transformers, which we call the Structure-Aware Transformer (SAT), can provide structure-aware representations of graphs, in contrast to most existing position-aware Transformers for graph-structured data. Specifically:
· We reformulate the self-attention mechanism in Vaswani et al. (2017) as a kernel smoother and extend the original exponential kernel on node features to also account for local structures, by extracting a subgraph representation centered around each node.
· We propose several methods for automatically generating the subgraph representations, enabling the resulting kernel smoother to simultaneously capture structural and attributed similarities between nodes. The resulting representations are theoretically guaranteed to be at least as expressive as the subgraph representations.
· We demonstrate the effectiveness of SAT models on five graph and node property prediction benchmarks by showing it achieves better performance than stateof-the-art GNNs and Transformers. Furthermore, we show how SAT can easily leverage any GNN to compute the node representations which incorporate subgraph information and outperform the base GNN, making it an effortless enhancer of any existing GNN.
· Finally, we show that we can attribute the performance gains to the structure-aware aspect of our architecture, and showcase how SAT is more interpretable than the classic Transformer with an absolute encoding.
We will present the related work and relevant background in Sections 2 and 3 before presenting our method in Section 4 and our experimental findings in Section 5.

2. Related Work
We present here the work most related to ours, namely the work stemming from message passing GNNs, positional representations on graphs, and graph Transformers.
Message passing graph neural networks Message passing graph neural networks have recently been one of the leading methods for graph representation learning. An early seminal example is the GCN (Kipf & Welling, 2017), which was based on performing convolutions on the graph. Gilmer et al. (2017) reformulated the early GNNs into a framework of message passing GNNs, which has since then become the predominant framework of GNNs in use today, with extensive examples (Hamilton et al., 2017; Xu et al., 2019; Corso et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2020b; Velickovic´ et al., 2018; Li et al., 2020a; Yang et al., 2022). However, as mentioned above, they suffer from problems of limited expressiveness, over-smoothing, and over-squashing.
Absolute encoding Because of the limited expressiveness of GNNs, there has been some recent research into the use of absolute encoding (Shaw et al., 2018), which consists of adding or concatenating positional or structural representations to the input node features. While it is often called an absolute positional encoding, we refer to it more generally as an absolute encoding to include both positional and structural encoding, which are both important in graph modeling. Absolute encoding primarily considers position or location relationships between nodes. Examples of position-based methods include the Laplacian positional encoding (Dwivedi & Bresson, 2021; Kreuzer et al., 2021), Weisfeiler­Lehman-based positional encoding (Zhang et al., 2020), and random walk positional encoding (RWPE) (Li et al., 2020b; Dwivedi et al., 2022), while distance-based methods include distances to a predefined set of nodes (You et al., 2019) and shortest path distances between pairs of nodes (Zhang et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020b). Dwivedi et al. (2022) extend these ideas by using a trainable absolute encoding.
Graph Transformers While the absolute encoding methods listed above can be used with message passing GNNs, they also play a crucial role in the (graph) Transformer architecture. Graph Transformer (Dwivedi & Bresson, 2021) provided an early example of how to generalize the Transformer architecture to graphs, using Laplacian eigenvectors as an absolute encoding and computing attention on the immediate neighborhood of each node, rather than on the full graph. SAN (Kreuzer et al., 2021) also used the Laplacian eigenvectors for computing an absolute encoding, but computed attention on the full graph, while distinguishing between true and created edges. Many graph Transformer methods also use a relative encoding (Shaw et al., 2018) in

