Patient Knowledge Distillation for BERT Model Compression
Siqi Sun, Yu Cheng, Zhe Gan, Jingjing Liu Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research
{Siqi.Sun,Yu.Cheng,Zhe.Gan,jingjl}@microsoft.com

arXiv:1908.09355v1 [cs.CL] 25 Aug 2019

Abstract
Pre-trained language models such as BERT have proven to be highly effective for natural language processing (NLP) tasks. However, the high demand for computing resources in training such models hinders their application in practice. In order to alleviate this resource hunger in large-scale model training, we propose a Patient Knowledge Distillation approach to compress an original large model (teacher) into an equally-effective lightweight shallow network (student). Different from previous knowledge distillation methods, which only use the output from the last layer of the teacher network for distillation, our student model patiently learns from multiple intermediate layers of the teacher model for incremental knowledge extraction, following two strategies: (i) PKD-Last: learning from the last k layers; and (ii) PKD-Skip: learning from every k layers. These two patient distillation schemes enable the exploitation of rich information in the teacher's hidden layers, and encourage the student model to patiently learn from and imitate the teacher through a multilayer distillation process. Empirically, this translates into improved results on multiple NLP tasks with significant gain in training efficiency, without sacrificing model accuracy.1
1 Introduction
Language model pre-training has proven to be highly effective in learning universal language representations from large-scale unlabeled data. ELMo (Peters et al., 2018), GPT (Radford et al., 2018) and BERT (Devlin et al., 2018) have achieved great success in many NLP tasks, such as sentiment classification (Socher et al., 2013), natural language inference (Williams et al., 2017), and question answering (Lai et al., 2017).
1Code will be avialable at https://github.com/ intersun/PKD-for-BERT-Model-Compression.

Despite its empirical success, BERT's computational efficiency is a widely recognized issue because of its large number of parameters. For example, the original BERT-Base model has 12 layers and 110 million parameters. Training from scratch typically takes four days on 4 to 16 Cloud TPUs. Even fine-tuning the pre-trained model with taskspecific dataset may take several hours to finish one epoch. Thus, reducing computational costs for such models is crucial for their application in practice, where computational resources are limited.
Motivated by this, we investigate the redundancy issue of learned parameters in large-scale pre-trained models, and propose a new model compression approach, Patient Knowledge Distillation (Patient-KD), to compress original teacher (e.g., BERT) into a lightweight student model without performance sacrifice. In our approach, the teacher model outputs probability logits and predicts labels for the training samples (extendable to additional unannotated samples), and the student model learns from the teacher network to mimic the teacher's prediction.
Different from previous knowledge distillation methods (Hinton et al., 2015; Sau and Balasubramanian, 2016; Lu et al., 2017), we adopt a patient learning mechanism: instead of learning parameters from only the last layer of the teacher, we encourage the student model to extract knowledge also from previous layers of the teacher network. We call this `Patient Knowledge Distillation'. This patient learner has the advantage of distilling rich information through the deep structure of the teacher network for multi-layer knowledge distillation.
We also propose two different strategies for the distillation process: (i) PKD-Last: the student learns from the last k layers of the teacher, under the assumption that the top layers of the original network contain the most informative knowledge

to teach the student; and (ii) PKD-Skip: the student learns from every k layers of the teacher, suggesting that the lower layers of the teacher network also contain important information and should be passed along for incremental distillation.
We evaluate the proposed approach on several NLP tasks, including Sentiment Classification, Paraphrase Similarity Matching, Natural Language Inference, and Machine Reading Comprehension. Experiments on seven datasets across these four tasks demonstrate that the proposed Patient-KD approach achieves superior performance and better generalization than standard knowledge distillation methods (Hinton et al., 2015), with significant gain in training efficiency and storage reduction while maintaining comparable model accuracy to original large models. To the authors' best knowledge, this is the first known effort for BERT model compression.
2 Related Work
Language Model Pre-training Pre-training has been widely applied to universal language representation learning. Previous work can be divided into two main categories: (i) feature-based approach; (ii) fine-tuning approach.
Feature-based methods mainly focus on learning: (i) context-independent word representation (e.g., word2vec (Mikolov et al., 2013), GloVe (Pennington et al., 2014), FastText (Bojanowski et al., 2017)); (ii) sentence-level representation (e.g., Kiros et al. (2015); Conneau et al. (2017); Logeswaran and Lee (2018)); and (iii) contextualized word representation (e.g., Cove (McCann et al., 2017), ELMo (Peters et al., 2018)). Specifically, ELMo (Peters et al., 2018) learns high-quality, deep contextualized word representation using bidirectional language model, which can be directly plugged into standard NLU models for performance boosting.
On the other hand, fine-tuning approaches mainly pre-train a language model (e.g., GPT (Radford et al., 2018), BERT (Devlin et al., 2018)) on a large corpus with an unsupervised objective, and then fine-tune the model with in-domain labeled data for downstream applications (Dai and Le, 2015; Howard and Ruder, 2018). Specifically, BERT is a large-scale language model consisting of multiple layers of Transformer blocks (Vaswani et al., 2017). BERT-Base has 12 layers of Transformer and 110

million parameters, while BERT-Large has 24 layers of Transformer and 330 million parameters. By pre-training via masked language modeling and next sentence prediction, BERT has achieved state-of-the-art performance on a wide-range of NLU tasks, such as the GLUE benchmark (Wang et al., 2018) and SQuAD (Rajpurkar et al., 2016).
However, these modern pre-trained language models contain millions of parameters, which hinders their application in practice where computational resource is limited. In this paper, we aim at addressing this critical and challenging problem, taking BERT as an example, i.e., how to compress a large BERT model into a shallower one without sacrificing performance. Besides, the proposed approach can also be applied to other large-scale pre-trained language models, such as recently proposed XLNet (Yang et al., 2019) and RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019b).
Model Compression & Knowledge Distillation Our focus is model compression, i.e., making deep neural networks more compact (Han et al., 2016; Cheng et al., 2015). A similar line of work has focused on accelerating deep network inference at test time (Vetrov et al., 2017) and reducing model training time (Huang et al., 2016).
A conventional understanding is that a large number of connections (weights) is necessary for training deep networks (Denil et al., 2013; Zhai et al., 2016). However, once the network has been trained, there will be a high degree of parameter redundancy. Network pruning (Han et al., 2015; He et al., 2017), in which network connections are reduced or sparsified, is one common strategy for model compression. Another direction is weight quantization (Gong et al., 2014; Polino et al., 2018), in which connection weights are constrained to a set of discrete values, allowing weights to be represented by fewer bits. However, most of these pruning and quantization approaches perform on convolutional networks. Only a few work are designed for rich structural information such as deep language models (Changpinyo et al., 2017).
Knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015) aims to compress a network with a large set of parameters into a compact and fast-to-execute model. This can be achieved by training a compact model to imitate the soft output of a larger model. Romero et al. (2015) further demonstrated that intermediate representations learned by the

