arXiv:1908.01000v3 [cs.LG] 17 Jan 2020

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
INFOGRAPH: UNSUPERVISED AND SEMI-SUPERVISED GRAPH-LEVEL REPRESENTATION LEARNING VIA MUTUAL INFORMATION MAXIMIZATION
Fan-Yun Sun1,2, Jordan Hoffmann2,4, Vikas Verma 2,3, Jian Tang2,5,6 1National Taiwan University, 2Mila-Quebec Institute for Learning Algorithms, Canada 3Aalto University, Finland 4Harvard University, USA 5HEC Montreal, Canada 6CIFAR AI Research Chair
b04902045@ntu.edu.tw jhoffmann@g.harvard.edu vikas.verma@aalto.fi jian.tang@hec.ca
ABSTRACT
This paper studies learning the representations of whole graphs in both unsupervised and semi-supervised scenarios. Graph-level representations are critical in a variety of real-world applications such as predicting the properties of molecules and community analysis in social networks. Traditional graph kernel based methods are simple, yet effective for obtaining fixed-length representations for graphs but they suffer from poor generalization due to hand-crafted designs. There are also some recent methods based on language models (e.g. graph2vec) but they tend to only consider certain substructures (e.g. subtrees) as graph representatives. Inspired by recent progress of unsupervised representation learning, in this paper we proposed a novel method called InfoGraph for learning graph-level representations. We maximize the mutual information between the graph-level representation and the representations of substructures of different scales (e.g., nodes, edges, triangles). By doing so, the graph-level representations encode aspects of the data that are shared across different scales of substructures. Furthermore, we further propose InfoGraph*, an extension of InfoGraph for semi-supervised scenarios. InfoGraph* maximizes the mutual information between unsupervised graph representations learned by InfoGraph and the representations learned by existing supervised methods. As a result, the supervised encoder learns from unlabeled data while preserving the latent semantic space favored by the current supervised task. Experimental results on the tasks of graph classification and molecular property prediction show that InfoGraph is superior to state-of-the-art baselines and InfoGraph* can achieve performance competitive with state-of-the-art semi-supervised models.
1 INTRODUCTION
Graphs have proven to be an effective way to represent very diverse types of data including social networks Newman & Girvan (2004), biological reaction networksPavlopoulos et al. (2011), proteinprotein interactions Krogan et al. (2006), the quantum mechanical properties of individual molecules Xie & Grossman (2018); Jin et al. (2018), and many more. Graphs provide explicit information about the coupling between individual units in a larger part along with a well defined framework for assigning properties to the nodes and the edges connecting them. There has been a significant amount of previous work done studying many aspects of graphs including link prediction Gao et al. (2011); Wang et al. (2011) and node prediction Blei et al. (2003). Due to its flexibility, graph-like data structures can capture rich information which is critical in many applications.
1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2020
At the lowest level, much work has been done on learning node representations­ low-dimensional vector embeddings of individual nodes Perozzi et al. (2014); Tang et al. (2015); Grover & Leskovec (2016). Another field that has attracted a large amount of attention recently is learning representations of entire graphs. Such a problem is critical in a variety of applications such as predicting the properties of molecular graphs in both drug discovery and material science Chen et al. (2019b;a). There has been some recent progress based on neural message passing algorithms Gilmer et al. (2017); Xie & Grossman (2018), which learn the representations of entire graphs in a supervised way. These methods have been shown achieving state-of-the-art results on a variety of different prediction tasks Kipf et al. (2018); Xie & Grossman (2018); Gilmer et al. (2017); Chen et al. (2019a).
However, one of the most difficult obstacles for supervised learning on graphs is that it is often very costly or even impossible to collect annotated labels. For example, in the chemical domain labels are typically produced with a costly Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculation. One option is to use semi-supervised methods which combine a small handful of labels with a larger, unlabeled, dataset. In real-world applications, partially labeled datasets are common, making tools that are able to efficiently utilize the present labels particularly useful.
Coming up with methods that are able to learn unsupervised representations of an entire graph, as opposed to nodes, is an important step in working with unlabeled or partially labeled graphs Narayanan et al. (2017); Hu et al. (2019); Nguyen et al. (2017). For example, there exists work that explores pre-training techniques for graphs to improve generalization Hu et al. (2019). Another common approach to unsupervised representation learning on graphs is through graph kernels Przulj (2007); Kashima et al. (2003); Orsini et al. (2015). However, many of these methods do not provide explicit graph embeddings which many machine learning algorithms operate on. Furthermore, the handcrafted features of graph kernels lead to high dimensional, sparse or non-smooth representations and thus result in poor generalization performance, especially on large datasets Narayanan et al. (2017).
Unsupervised learning of latent representations is also an important problem in other domains, such as image generation Kingma & Welling (2013); Kim & Mnih (2018) and natural language processing Mikolov et al. (2013a). A recent work introduced Deep Infomax, a method that maximizes the mutual information content between the input data and the learned representation Hjelm et al. (2018). This method outperforms other methods on many unsupervised learning tasks. Motivated by Deep InfoMax Hjelm et al. (2018), we aim to use mutual information maximization for unsupervised representation learning on the entire graph. Specifically, our objective is to maximize the mutual information between the representations of entire graphs and the representations of substructures of different granularity. We name our model InfoGraph.
We also propose a semi-supervised learning model which we name InfoGraph*. We employ a student-teacher framework similar to Mean-Teacher method Tarvainen & Valpola (2017). We maximize the mutual information between intermediate representations of the two models so that the student model learns from the teacher model. The student model is trained on the labeled data using a supervised objective function while the teacher model is trained on unlabeled data with InfoGraph. Using InfoGraph*, we achieve performance competitive with state-of-the-art methods on molecular property prediction.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
· We propose InfoGraph, an unsupervised graph representation learning method based on Deep InfoMax (DIM) Hjelm et al. (2018).
· We show that InfoGraph can be extended to semi-supervised prediction tasks on graphs. · We empirically show that InfoGraph surpasses state-of-the-art performance on graph classi-
fication tasks with unsupervised learning and obtains performance comparable with state-ofart methods on molecular property prediction tasks using semi-supervised learning.
2 RELATED WORK
Representation learning for graphs has mainly dealt with supervised learning tasks. Recently, however, researchers have proposed algorithms that learn graph-level representations in an unsupervised manner Narayanan et al. (2017); Adhikari et al. (2018).
2

