arXiv:1801.09127v2 [math.RA] 27 Feb 2018

X-GORENSTEIN PROJECTIVE DIMENSIONS
ZHIBING ZHAO1, XIAOWEI XU2
1School of Mathematical Sciences, Anhui University, Hefei, Anhui 230039 2School of Mathematical Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130012
Abstract. In this paper, we mainly investigate the X-Gorenstein projective dimension of modules and the (left) X-Gorenstein global dimension of rings. Some properties of X-Gorenstein projective dimensions are obtained. Furthermore, we prove that the (left) X-Gorenstein global dimension of a ring R is equal to the supremum of the set of X-Gorenstein projective dimensions of all cyclic (left) Rmodules. This result extends the well-known Auslander's theorem on the global dimension and its Gorenstein homological version.
2010 Mathematics Subject Classfication: 16D80, 16E10, 16G50 Key words: X-Gorenstein projective modules, X-Gorenstein projective dimensions of modules, X-Gorenstein global projective dimensions of rings
1. Introduction
Throughout this paper, R always denotes a non-trivial associative ring with identity. All modules are unital left R-modules. We denote the category of all left R-modules by R-Mod. The full subcategory of R-Mod consisting of all Gorenstein projective R-modules (resp. all projective R-modules) are denoted by GP(R) (resp. P(R)). We use pd(M ) and Gpd(M ) to denote, respectively, the projective dimension and Gorenstein projective dimension of M . We always assume that X is a class of R-modules which contains all projective R-modules.
As a generalization of finitely generated projective modules over a noetherian ring R, Auslander and Bridger [3] introduced in 1969 the notion of the module with G-dimension zero. The G-dimension for finitely generated R-module M , denoted by G-dim(M ), is defined via resolution with this kind of module. They proved that G-dim(M )  pd(M ), with equality G-dim(M ) = pd(M ) when pd(M ) is finite. Furthermore, they give a characterization of the Gorenstein local rings in terms of G-dimension in [2]. Namely, R is Gorenstein if its residue field k has finite G-dimension, and only if every finitely generated R-module has finite G-dimension.
Over an arbitrary ring R, Enochs and Jenda defined in [11] the Gorenstein projective module as follows Definition. An R-module M is said to be Gorenstein projective if there exists a completed
The first author was partially supported by Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11571329), the Natural Science Foundation of Anhui Province (No. 1708085MA01) and Project of University Natural Science Research of Anhui Province (No. KJ2015A101). The second author was partially supported by Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11771176).
Email: 1zbzhao@ahu.edu.cn, 2xuxw@jlu.edu.cn. 1

2

ZHIBING ZHAO1, XIAOWEI XU2

projective resolution

P := · · ·  P1  P0  P 0  P 1  · · ·

being exact in R-Mod which is still exact after applying HomR(-, P ) for any projective module P and M = Ker(P0  P 0).
The exact sequence P is called a complete projective resolution of M .

Avramov, Buchweitz, Martsinkovsky and Reiten proved that a finitely generated module over a noetherian ring is Gorenstein projective if and only if it is a module with G-dimension zero (see [8, Theorem 4.2.6] and [8, P.99]). The Gorenstein projective modules share many nice properties of the classical projective module (see, for instance, [7, 8, 12, 14, 15]). Gorenstein projective dimension of an arbitrary R-module, Gpd(M ), is defined via resolution with Gorenstein projective modules. This kind of homological dimension is analogous to the classical projective dimension and shares some of its principal properties (see [4, 5, 8, 14] for more details).
In [6], Bennis and Ouarghi introduced the notion of X-Gorenstein projective module where X is a class of R-modules that contains all projective R-modules (see Definition 2.1). This notion uniforms some homological modules, including projective modules, Gorenstein projective modules and strongly Gorenstein flat modules and so on (see Remark 2.2). Similar to the Gorenstein projective dimension, the X-Gorenstein projective dimension is defined via resolution with X-Gorenstein projective modules.
In this paper, we will investigate some properties of X-Gorenstein projective dimension of modules and X-Gorenstein global projective dimensions of rings.
In section 2, we will give some basic properties of X-Gorenstein projective modules. Section 3 deal with the X-Gorenstein projective dimension, X-Gpd(-). Firstly, we establish the following equality.

Proposition. For any family of R-modules (Mi)iI,
X-Gpd( Mi) = sup{X-Gpd(Mi) | i  I}.
iI
Note that this result is a generalization of [14, Proposition 2.19]. The following properties for X-Gorenstein projective dimension are similar to those of classical projective dimension.

Theorem. Let 0  A  B  C  0 be a short exact sequence in R-Mod. If two of the modules A, B and C have finite X-Gorenstein projective dimension, then so has the third.

Some relations among some homological global dimensions are also studied in this section. We show that the (left) classical finitistic projective dimension l.FPD(R), (left) finitistic Gorenstein projective dimension l.FGPD(R) and (left) finitistic X-Gorenstein projective dimension, l.X-FGPD(R), of an arbitrary ring R are equal. The last is defined as
l.X -FGPD(R) = sup{X-Gpd(M ) | M is an R-module with X -Gpd(M ) < }.

