arXiv:1902.10197v1 [cs.LG] 26 Feb 2019

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019
ROTATE: KNOWLEDGE GRAPH EMBEDDING BY RELATIONAL ROTATION IN COMPLEX SPACE
Zhiqing Sun 1, Zhi-Hong Deng1, Jian-Yun Nie3, Jian Tang2,4,5 1Peking University, China 2Mila-Quebec Institute for Learning Algorithms, Canada 3Universite´ de Montre´al, Canada 4HEC Montre´al, Canada 5CIFAR AI Research Chair {1500012783, zhdeng}@pku.edu.cn nie@iro.umontreal.ca jian.tang@hec.ca
ABSTRACT
We study the problem of learning representations of entities and relations in knowledge graphs for predicting missing links. The success of such a task heavily relies on the ability of modeling and inferring the patterns of (or between) the relations. In this paper, we present a new approach for knowledge graph embedding called RotatE, which is able to model and infer various relation patterns including: symmetry/antisymmetry, inversion, and composition. Specifically, the RotatE model defines each relation as a rotation from the source entity to the target entity in the complex vector space. In addition, we propose a novel self-adversarial negative sampling technique for efficiently and effectively training the RotatE model. Experimental results on multiple benchmark knowledge graphs show that the proposed RotatE model is not only scalable, but also able to infer and model various relation patterns and significantly outperform existing state-of-the-art models for link prediction.
1 INTRODUCTION
Knowledge graphs are collections of factual triplets, where each triplet (h, r, t) represents a relation r between a head entity h and a tail entity t. Examples of real-world knowledge graphs include Freebase (Bollacker et al., 2008), Yago (Suchanek et al., 2007), and WordNet (Miller, 1995). Knowledge graphs are potentially useful to a variety of applications such as question-answering (Hao et al., 2017), information retrieval (Xiong et al., 2017), recommender systems (Zhang et al., 2016), and natural language processing (Yang & Mitchell, 2017). Research on knowledge graphs is attracting growing interests in both academia and industry communities.
Since knowledge graphs are usually incomplete, a fundamental problem for knowledge graph is predicting the missing links. Recently, extensive studies have been done on learning low-dimensional representations of entities and relations for missing link prediction (a.k.a., knowledge graph embedding) (Bordes et al., 2013; Trouillon et al., 2016; Dettmers et al., 2017). These methods have been shown to be scalable and effective. The general intuition of these methods is to model and infer the connectivity patterns in knowledge graphs according to the observed knowledge facts. For example, some relations are symmetric (e.g., marriage) while others are antisymmetric (e.g., filiation); some relations are the inverse of other relations (e.g., hypernym and hyponym); and some relations may be composed by others (e.g., my mother's husband is my father). It is critical to find ways to model and infer these patterns, i.e., symmetry/antisymmetry, inversion, and composition, from the observed facts in order to predict missing links.
Indeed, many existing approaches have been trying to either implicitly or explicitly model one or a few of the above relation patterns (Bordes et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2014; Lin et al., 2015b;
This work was done when the first author was visiting Mila and Universite´ de Montre´al.
1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2019

Model
SE (Bordes et al., 2011) TransE (Bordes et al., 2013)
TransX DistMult (Yang et al., 2014) ComplEx (Trouillon et al., 2016) HolE (Nickel et al., 2016) ConvE (Dettmers et al., 2017)
RotatE

Score Function

- Wr,1h - Wr,2t - h+r-t
- gr,1(h) + r - gr,2(t) r, h, t
Re( r, h, t ) r, h  t
(vec(([r, h]  ))W ), t

h, t  Rk, Wr,·  Rk×k h, r, t  Rk h, r, t  Rk h, r, t  Rk h, r, t  Ck h, r, t  Rk h, r, t  Rk

- hr-t 2

h, r, t  Ck, |ri| = 1

Table 1: The score functions fr(h, t) of several knowledge graph embedding models, where · denotes the generalized dot product,  denotes the Hadamard product,  denotes circular correlation,  denotes activation function and  denotes 2D convolution. · denotes conjugate for complex vectors, and 2D reshaping for real vectors in ConvE model. TransX represents a wide range of TransE's variants, such as TransH (Wang et al., 2014), TransR (Lin et al., 2015b), and STransE (Nguyen et al., 2016), where gr,i(·) denotes a matrix multiplication with respect to relation r.

Yang et al., 2014; Trouillon et al., 2016). For example, the TransE model (Bordes et al., 2011), which represents relations as translations, aims to model the inversion and composition patterns; the DisMult model (Yang et al., 2014), which models the three-way interactions between head entities, relations, and tail entities, aims to model the symmetry pattern. However, none of existing models is capable of modeling and inferring all the above patterns. Therefore, we are looking for an approach that is able to model and infer all the three types of relation patterns.

In this paper, we propose such an approach called RotatE for knowledge graph embedding. Our motivation is from Euler's identity ei = cos  + i sin , which indicates that a unitary complex
number can be regarded as a rotation in the complex plane. Specifically, the RotatE model maps
the entities and relations to the complex vector space and defines each relation as a rotation from
the source entity to the target entity. Given a triplet (h, r, t), we expect that t = h  r, where h, r, t  Ck are the embeddings, the modulus |ri| = 1 and  denotes the Hadamard (element-wise) product. Specifically, for each dimension in the complex space, we expect that:

ti = hiri, where hi, ri, ti  C and |ri| = 1.

(1)

It turns out that such a simple operation can effectively model all the three relation patterns: symmetric/antisymmetric, inversion, and composition. For example, a relation r is symmetric if and only if each element of its embedding r, i.e. ri, satisfies ri = e0/i = ±1; two relations r1 and r2 are inverse if and only if their embeddings are conjugates: r2 = ¯r1; a relation r3 = ei3 is a combination of other two relations r1 = ei1 and r2 = ei2 if and only if r3 = r1  r2 (i.e. 3 = 1 + 2). Moreover, the RotatE model is scalable to large knowledge graphs as it remains linear in both time and memory.

To effectively optimizing the RotatE, we further propose a novel self-adversarial negative sampling technique, which generates negative samples according to the current entity and relation embeddings. The proposed technique is very general and can be applied to many existing knowledge graph embedding models. We evaluate the RotatE on four large knowledge graph benchmark datasets including FB15k (Bordes et al., 2013), WN18 (Bordes et al., 2013), FB15k-237 (Toutanova & Chen, 2015) and WN18RR (Dettmers et al., 2017). Experimental results show that the RotatE model significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art approaches. In addition, RotatE also outperforms state-of-the-art models on Countries (Bouchard et al., 2015), a benchmark explicitly designed for composition pattern inference and modeling. To the best of our knowledge, RotatE is the first model that achieves state-of-the-art performance on all the benchmarks.1

2 RELATED WORK
1The codes of our paper are available online: https://github.com/DeepGraphLearning/ KnowledgeGraphEmbedding.
2The p-norm of a complex vector v is defined as v p = p |vi|p. We use L1-norm for all distancebased models in this paper and drop the subscript of · 1 for brevity.

2

