Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision

arXiv:2103.00020v1 [cs.CV] 26 Feb 2021

Alec Radford * 1 Jong Wook Kim * 1 Chris Hallacy 1 Aditya Ramesh 1 Gabriel Goh 1 Sandhini Agarwal 1 Girish Sastry 1 Amanda Askell 1 Pamela Mishkin 1 Jack Clark 1 Gretchen Krueger 1 Ilya Sutskever 1

Abstract
State-of-the-art computer vision systems are trained to predict a fixed set of predetermined object categories. This restricted form of supervision limits their generality and usability since additional labeled data is needed to specify any other visual concept. Learning directly from raw text about images is a promising alternative which leverages a much broader source of supervision. We demonstrate that the simple pre-training task of predicting which caption goes with which image is an efficient and scalable way to learn SOTA image representations from scratch on a dataset of 400 million (image, text) pairs collected from the internet. After pre-training, natural language is used to reference learned visual concepts (or describe new ones) enabling zero-shot transfer of the model to downstream tasks. We study the performance of this approach by benchmarking on over 30 different existing computer vision datasets, spanning tasks such as OCR, action recognition in videos, geo-localization, and many types of fine-grained object classification. The model transfers non-trivially to most tasks and is often competitive with a fully supervised baseline without the need for any dataset specific training. For instance, we match the accuracy of the original ResNet-50 on ImageNet zero-shot without needing to use any of the 1.28 million training examples it was trained on. We release our code and pre-trained model weights at https://github.com/OpenAI/CLIP.
1. Introduction and Motivating Work
Pre-training methods which learn directly from raw text have revolutionized NLP over the last few years (Dai & Le, 2015; Peters et al., 2018; Howard & Ruder, 2018; Radford et al., 2018; Devlin et al., 2018; Raffel et al., 2019).
*Equal contribution 1OpenAI, San Francisco, CA 94110, USA. Correspondence to: <{alec, jongwook}@openai.com>.

Task-agnostic objectives such as autoregressive and masked language modeling have scaled across many orders of magnitude in compute, model capacity, and data, steadily improving capabilities. The development of "text-to-text" as a standardized input-output interface (McCann et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019; Raffel et al., 2019) has enabled taskagnostic architectures to zero-shot transfer to downstream datasets removing the need for specialized output heads or dataset specific customization. Flagship systems like GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020) are now competitive across many tasks with bespoke models while requiring little to no dataset specific training data.
These results suggest that the aggregate supervision accessible to modern pre-training methods within web-scale collections of text surpasses that of high-quality crowd-labeled NLP datasets. However, in other fields such as computer vision it is still standard practice to pre-train models on crowd-labeled datasets such as ImageNet (Deng et al., 2009). Could scalable pre-training methods which learn directly from web text result in a similar breakthrough in computer vision? Prior work is encouraging.
Over 20 years ago Mori et al. (1999) explored improving content based image retrieval by training a model to predict the nouns and adjectives in text documents paired with images. Quattoni et al. (2007) demonstrated it was possible to learn more data efficient image representations via manifold learning in the weight space of classifiers trained to predict words in captions associated with images. Srivastava & Salakhutdinov (2012) explored deep representation learning by training multimodal Deep Boltzmann Machines on top of low-level image and text tag features. Joulin et al. (2016) modernized this line of work and demonstrated that CNNs trained to predict words in image captions learn useful image representations. They converted the title, description, and hashtag metadata of images in the YFCC100M dataset (Thomee et al., 2016) into a bag-ofwords multi-label classification task and showed that pretraining AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) to predict these labels learned representations which preformed similarly to ImageNet-based pre-training on transfer tasks. Li et al. (2017) then extended this approach to predicting phrase ngrams in addition to individual words and demonstrated the ability of their system to zero-shot transfer to other image

Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision

2

(1) Contrastive pre-training

aPPauePauepsPauepspseupspseipspseierspiereeierptretpuhptuheppthupeuhpeep

Text Encoder

Image Encoder

I1 I2 I3  IN

(2) Create dataset classifier from label text

...

T1

T2

T3

...

TN

I1톂1 I1톂2 I1톂3 ... I1톂N I2톂1 I2톂2 I2톂3 ... I2톂N

plane

car

dog





bird

A photo of a {object}.

(3) Use for zero-shot prediction

Text Encoder

I3톂1 I3톂2 I3톂3 ... I3톂N







Image Encoder

I1

IN톂1 IN톂2 IN톂3 ... IN톂N

...

T1

T2

T3

...

TN

I1톂1 I1톂2 I1톂3 ... I1톂N

A photo of a dog.

Figure 1. Summary of our approach. While standard image models jointly train an image feature extractor and a linear classifier to predict some label, CLIP jointly trains an image encoder and a text encoder to predict the correct pairings of a batch of (image, text) training examples. At test time the learned text encoder synthesizes a zero-shot linear classifier by embedding the names or descriptions of the target dataset's classes.

classification datasets by scoring target classes based on their dictionary of learned visual n-grams and predicting the one with the highest score. Adopting more recent architectures and pre-training approaches, VirTex (Desai & Johnson, 2020), ICMLM (Bulent Sariyildiz et al., 2020), and ConVIRT (Zhang et al., 2020) have recently demonstrated the potential of transformer-based language modeling, masked language modeling, and contrastive objectives to learn image representations from text.
While exciting as proofs of concept, using natural language supervision for image representation learning is still rare. This is likely because demonstrated performance on common benchmarks is much lower than alternative approaches. For example, Li et al. (2017) reach only 11.5% accuracy on ImageNet in a zero-shot setting. This is well below the 88.4% accuracy of the current state of the art (Xie et al., 2020). It is even below the 50% accuracy of classic computer vision approaches (Deng et al., 2012). Instead, more narrowly scoped but well-targeted uses of weak supervision have improved performance. Mahajan et al. (2018) showed that predicting ImageNet-related hashtags on Instagram images is an effective pre-training task. When fine-tuned to ImageNet these pre-trained models increased accuracy by over 5% and improved the overall state of the art at the time. Kolesnikov et al. (2019) and Dosovitskiy et al. (2020) have also demonstrated large gains on a broader set of transfer benchmarks by pre-training models to predict the classes of the noisily labeled JFT-300M dataset.
This line of work represents the current pragmatic middle ground between learning from a limited amount of supervised "gold-labels" and learning from practically unlimited amounts of raw text. However, it is not without compro-

mises. Both works carefully design, and in the process limit, their supervision to 1000 and 18291 classes respectively. Natural language is able to express, and therefore supervise, a much wider set of visual concepts through its generality. Both approaches also use static softmax classifiers to perform prediction and lack a mechanism for dynamic outputs. This severely curtails their flexibility and limits their "zero-shot" capabilities.
A crucial difference between these weakly supervised models and recent explorations of learning image representations directly from natural language is scale. While Mahajan et al. (2018) and Kolesnikov et al. (2019) trained their models for accelerator years on millions to billions of images, VirTex, ICMLM, and ConVIRT trained for accelerator days on one to two hundred thousand images. In this work, we close this gap and study the behaviors of image classifiers trained with natural language supervision at large scale. Enabled by the large amounts of publicly available data of this form on the internet, we create a new dataset of 400 million (image, text) pairs and demonstrate that a simplified version of ConVIRT trained from scratch, which we call CLIP, for Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training, is an efficient method of learning from natural language supervision. We study the scalability of CLIP by training a series of eight models spanning almost 2 orders of magnitude of compute and observe that transfer performance is a smoothly predictable function of compute (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan et al., 2020). We find that CLIP, similar to the GPT family, learns to perform a wide set of tasks during pre-training including OCR, geo-localization, action recognition, and many others. We measure this by benchmarking the zero-shot transfer performance of CLIP on over 30 existing datasets and find

