BLIP: Bootstrapping Language-Image Pre-training for Unified Vision-Language Understanding and Generation

arXiv:2201.12086v2 [cs.CV] 15 Feb 2022

Junnan Li Dongxu Li Caiming Xiong Steven Hoi Salesforce Research
https://github.com/salesforce/BLIP

Abstract
Vision-Language Pre-training (VLP) has advanced the performance for many vision-language tasks. However, most existing pre-trained models only excel in either understanding-based tasks or generation-based tasks. Furthermore, performance improvement has been largely achieved by scaling up the dataset with noisy image-text pairs collected from the web, which is a suboptimal source of supervision. In this paper, we propose BLIP, a new VLP framework which transfers flexibly to both vision-language understanding and generation tasks. BLIP effectively utilizes the noisy web data by bootstrapping the captions, where a captioner generates synthetic captions and a filter removes the noisy ones. We achieve state-of-the-art results on a wide range of vision-language tasks, such as image-text retrieval (+2.7% in average recall@1), image captioning (+2.8% in CIDEr), and VQA (+1.6% in VQA score). BLIP also demonstrates strong generalization ability when directly transferred to videolanguage tasks in a zero-shot manner. Code, models, and datasets are released.
1. Introduction
Vision-language pre-training has recently received tremendous success on various multimodal downstream tasks. However, existing methods have two major limitations:
(1) Model perspective: most methods either adopt an encoder-based model (Radford et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021a), or an encoder-decoder (Cho et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021) model. However, encoder-based models are less straightforward to directly transfer to text generation tasks (e.g. image captioning), whereas encoder-decoder models have not been successfully adopted for image-text retrieval tasks.
(2) Data perspective: most state-of-the-art methods (e.g., CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), ALBEF (Li et al., 2021a), SimVLM (Wang et al., 2021)) pre-train on image-text pairs

"blue sky bakery in

sunset park "

Filt

"chocolate cake

with cream frosting

Cap

and chocolate

Filt

sprinkles on top"

Figure 1. We use a Captioner (Cap) to generate synthetic captions for web images, and a Filter (Filt) to remove noisy captions.

collected from the web. Despite the performance gain obtained by scaling up the dataset, our paper shows that the noisy web text is suboptimal for vision-language learning.
To this end, we propose BLIP: Bootstrapping LanguageImage Pre-training for unified vision-language understanding and generation. BLIP is a new VLP framework which enables a wider range of downstream tasks than existing methods. It introduces two contributions from the model and data perspective, respectively:
(a) Multimodal mixture of Encoder-Decoder (MED): a new model architecture for effective multi-task pre-training and flexible transfer learning. An MED can operate either as a unimodal encoder, or an image-grounded text encoder, or an image-grounded text decoder. The model is jointly pre-trained with three vision-language objectives: imagetext contrastive learning, image-text matching, and imageconditioned language modeling.
(b) Captioning and Filtering (CapFilt): a new dataset boostrapping method for learning from noisy image-text pairs. We finetune a pre-trained MED into two modules: a captioner to produce synthetic captions given web images, and a filter to remove noisy captions from both the original web texts and the synthetic texts.
We perform extensive experiments and analysis, and make the following key observations.
· We show that the captioner and the filter work together to achieve substantial performance improvement on various downstream tasks by bootstrapping the captions. We also find that more diverse captions yield larger gains.
· BLIP achieves state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of vision-language tasks, including image-text re-

BLIP: Bootstrapping Language-Image Pre-training for Unified Vision-Language Understanding and Generation

ITC

ITM

LM

Feed Forward

Feed Forward

Feed Forward

Feed Forward

N× Self Attention

N×

Cross Attention

Cross Attention

Cross Attention

Image Encoder

Bi Self-Att

Bi Self-Att

Causal Self-Att

Text

Image-grounded

Image-grounded

Encoder "[CLS] +

"

Text encoder "[Encode] +

" Text decoder "[Decode] +

"

"a little girl holding a kitten next to a blue fence"
Figure 2. Pre-training model architecture and objectives of BLIP (same parameters have the same color). We propose multimodal mixture of encoder-decoder, a unified vision-language model which can operate in one of the three functionalities: (1) Unimodal encoder is trained with an image-text contrastive (ITC) loss to align the vision and language representations. (2) Image-grounded text encoder uses additional cross-attention layers to model vision-language interactions, and is trained with a image-text matching (ITM) loss to distinguish between positive and negative image-text pairs. (3) Image-grounded text decoder replaces the bi-directional self-attention layers with causal self-attention layers, and shares the same cross-attention layers and feed forward networks as the encoder. The decoder is trained with a language modeling (LM) loss to generate captions given images.

trieval, image captioning, visual question answering, visual reasoning, and visual dialog. We also achieve state-ofthe-art zero-shot performance when directly transferring our models to two video-language tasks: text-to-video retrieval and videoQA.
2. Related Work
2.1. Vision-language Pre-training
Vision-language pre-training (VLP) aims to improve performance of downstream vision and language tasks by pretraining the model on large-scale image-text pairs. Due to the prohibitive expense of acquiring human-annotated texts, most methods (Chen et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020; 2021a; Wang et al., 2021; Radford et al., 2021) use image and alt-text pairs crawled from the web (Sharma et al., 2018; Changpinyo et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021), Despite the use of simple rule-based filters, noise is still prevalent in the web texts. However, the negative impact of the noise has been largely overlooked, shadowed by the performance gain obtained from scaling up the dataset. Our paper shows that the noisy web texts are suboptimal for vision-language learning, and proposes CapFilt that utilizes web datasets in a more effective way.
There have been many attempts to unify various vision and language tasks into a single framework (Zhou et al., 2020; Cho et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021). The biggest challenge is to design model architectures that can perform both understanding-based tasks (e.g. image-text retrieval) and generation-based tasks (e.g. image captioning). Neither

encoder-based models (Li et al., 2021a;b; Radford et al., 2021) nor encoder-decoder models (Cho et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021) can excel at both types of tasks, whereas a single unified encoder-decoder (Zhou et al., 2020) also limits the model's capability. Our proposed multimodal mixture of encoder-decoder model offers more flexibility and better performance on a wide range of downstream tasks, in the meantime keeping the pre-training simple and efficient.
2.2. Knowledge Distillation
Knowledge distillation (KD) (Hinton et al., 2015) aims to improve the performance of a student model by distilling knowledge from a teacher model. Self-distillation is a special case of KD where the teacher and student have equal sizes. It has been shown to be effective for image classification (Xie et al., 2020), and recently for VLP (Li et al., 2021a). Different from mostly existing KD methods which simply enforce the student to have the same class predictions as the teacher, our proposed CapFilt can be interpreted as a more effective way to perform KD in the context of VLP, where the captioner distills its knowledge through semantically-rich synthetic captions, and the filter distills its knowledge by removing noisy captions.
2.3. Data Augmentation
While data augmentation (DA) has been widely adopted in computer vision (Shorten & Khoshgoftaar, 2019), DA for language tasks is less straightforward. Recently, generative language models have been used to synthesize examples for various NLP tasks (Kumar et al., 2020; Anaby-Tavor

