arXiv:2605.16468v1 [cs.CV] 15 May 2026

Mechanistically Interpretable Neural Encoding Reveals Fine-Grained Functional Selectivity in Human
Visual Cortex
Idan Daniel Grosbard1 Mor Geva2, Galit Yovel1,3, 1Sagol School of Neuroscience,
2Blavatnik School of Computer Science and AI, 3School of Psychological Sciences, Tel Aviv University
{idangrosbard@mail, morgeva@tauex, gality@tauex}.tau.ac.il
Abstract
A central goal in understanding human vision is to uncover the visual features that drive neuronal activity. A growing body of work has used artificial neural networks as encoding models to predict cortical responses to natural images, revealing the visual content that activates category-selective regions. However, existing approaches are largely correlational and treat the encoder as a black box, leaving open which image features drive each voxel's response. We introduce Mechanistically Interpretable Neural Encoding (MINE), a framework that opens this black box by applying mechanistic-interpretability tools to localize the features within natural images that drive millimeter-scale (i.e., voxel-level) activity. MINE predicts each voxel's response using language-aligned image representations, and produces semantically interpretable descriptions of the features critical for the voxel's activation. We further generalize these per-image features into per-voxel functional profiles. To validate the per-image descriptions, we show they are sufficient to generate images that elicit voxel responses matching the responses to the original images, more accurately than images generated from random or low-attribution controls. Moreover, counterfactually inserting or removing the predicted features from images shifts activation in the expected direction, providing causal evidence. Counterfactual editing guided by the per-voxel activation profiles produces even stronger activation shifts, indicating that the profiles faithfully capture each voxel's selectivity. Finally, we apply MINE to well-studied categoryselective brain regions, showing it recovers their known categorical preferences while revealing fine-grained unique voxel structure within each region. Overall, our results establish mechanistic interpretability as a path to discover and causally validate fine-grained hypotheses about neural function.
1 Introduction
A key step towards understanding how the brain processes visual information is to explain the functional role of its underlying computational units [1, 2]. Early works applied controlled comparisons of different visual stimuli to identify functionally selective cortical regions, i.e., regions whose responses are reliably stronger for one stimulus category (e.g., faces, places, bodies) than for others [3­5]. While this approach has led to significant findings, it is limited by its hypothesis-driven nature and the need for large datasets of hand-picked images. Recent works have studied the functional selectivity
Equal senior authorship.
Preprint.

profiles using the alignment between Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) and the neural responses of the visual cortex to these images [6­13]. This path enabled the prediction of neural responses based on large datasets of naturalistic images. For example, Hwang et al. [7], Wasserman et al. [8] used this approach to identify novel functional regions encoding concepts such as specific locations and tool use. Matsuyama et al. [6], Luo et al. [9] have characterized the functional selectivity of individual voxels (1 mm³ volumes sampled by functional magnetic resonance imaging, fMRI), while the works of Yang et al. [10], Gao et al. [12] identified poly-semantic functional selectivity profiles.
Although these works provide valuable insights, their correlational nature contains several limitations. First, correlational evidence -- however carefully constructed -- cannot fully separate genuine selectivity from spurious associations introduced by dataset structure [6­8]. Moreover, many studies identified preferred images (i.e., images that elicit the strongest activations), rather than the critical features within images that drive the activation [6­9]. Other studies that did localize critical features within images had limited validation for their contribution to the voxel's activation [13­15]. A different line of works, while generating higher-resolution functional profile hypotheses, their validation typically confirms broad alignment with the categorical selectivity of the surrounding region, leaving the fine-grained voxel-level profiles directly untested [9­13]. Similar limitations have been identified in the field of ANN interpretability research [16, 17], and have led to the adoption of Mechanistic Interpretability (MI) based research methods [18], a school focused on understanding the internal mechanisms by which models implement their behavior, often through causal interventions [19].
Drawing on this paradigm shift in ANN interpretability, we propose a new framework for interpreting neural encoding models, termed Mechanistically Interpretable Neural Encoding (MINE)2, which relies on MI tools. In this framework, we study the mechanism of how an encoder uses the input information to predict neural activity. By understanding the model mechanism, we can identify the per-image visual features that drive the neural response prediction. Specifically, to ensure the model uses semantically interpretable features we train an encoder to predict neural recordings based on highly-detailed textually-aligned image representations. We then localize the critical information used to predict the neural responses. Using standard interpretability tools for decoding representations [20], we can generate textual hypotheses about the visual features that a voxel responds to. Finally, we validate these hypotheses using counterfactual image editing, surgically manipulating images to change the model prediction by adding, or removing, candidate critical features. An overview of the MINE framework is illustrated in Figure 1. To summarize, our contribution is threefold:
1. We propose a mechanistic framework for modeling neural activity with built-in interpretability, to generate fine-grained, testable hypotheses about the features driving individual voxels' responses.
2. We validate the framework with causal counterfactual analyses, showing that our method faithfully reveals the critical features driving each voxel's response.
3. Applied to category-selective regions, our method recovers their known categorical preferences and uncovers novel fine-grained unique voxel structure, providing both validation and novel insights into voxel-level organization.
2 Related work
Hypothesis generation based on neural modelling Several works have used encoding models, i.e., neural networks trained to predict brain activity from a stimulus, to profile voxels' functional selectivity. One line of work [9, 10, 21] has utilized the high alignment between CLIP [22] and neural responses to images in high-level visual cortex [23] to effectively map voxels to embeddings in CLIP's representational space, allowing the use of decoding methods that rely on CLIP's language alignment [24, 25]. While providing a powerful framework for succinct concepts, these methods share a common limitation introduced by CLIP's short captions [26], preventing the model from generating fine-grained hypotheses (see Appendix B.5 for an empirical comparison between caption-based and image-based encoders). We overcome this limitation by mapping voxel representations to LLaVA image-tokens [27, 28], which provide detailed and grounded descriptions of the image content [29]. A second line of work similarly fit in-silico models of the visual cortex, which were used to evaluate the predicted neural response to large image datasets [6­8, 12]. These works used Vision Language
2Code is available at https://github.com/idangrosbard/MINE-Framework.git.
2

