Visual Autoregressive Modeling: Scalable Image Generation via Next-Scale Prediction

Keyu Tian1,2, Yi Jiang2,, Zehuan Yuan2,, Bingyue Peng2, Liwei Wang1,

1Peking University

2Bytedance Inc

keyutian@stu.pku.edu.cn, jiangyi.enjoy@bytedance.com, yuanzehuan@bytedance.com, bingyue.peng@bytedance.com, wanglw@pku.edu.cn

Try and explore our online demo at: https://var.vision Codes and models: https://github.com/FoundationVision/VAR

arXiv:2404.02905v2 [cs.CV] 10 Jun 2024

Figure 1: Generated samples from Visual AutoRegressive (VAR) transformers trained on ImageNet. We show 512×512 samples (top), 256×256 samples (middle), and zero-shot image editing results (bottom).
Abstract
We present Visual AutoRegressive modeling (VAR), a new generation paradigm that redefines the autoregressive learning on images as coarse-to-fine "next-scale prediction" or "next-resolution prediction", diverging from the standard raster-scan "next-token prediction". This simple, intuitive methodology allows autoregressive (AR) transformers to learn visual distributions fast and can generalize well: VAR, for the first time, makes GPT-style AR models surpass diffusion transformers in image generation. On ImageNet 256×256 benchmark, VAR significantly improve AR baseline by improving Fréchet inception distance (FID) from 18.65 to 1.73, inception score (IS) from 80.4 to 350.2, with 20× faster inference speed. It is also empirically verified that VAR outperforms the Diffusion Transformer (DiT) in multiple dimensions including image quality, inference speed, data efficiency, and scalability. Scaling up VAR models exhibits clear power-law scaling laws similar to those observed in LLMs, with linear correlation coefficients near -0.998 as solid evidence. VAR further showcases zero-shot generalization ability in downstream tasks including image in-painting, out-painting, and editing. These results suggest VAR has initially emulated the two important properties of LLMs: Scaling Laws and zero-shot generalization. We have released all models and codes to promote the exploration of AR/VAR models for visual generation and unified learning.
Corresponding authors: wanglw@pku.edu.cn, yuanzehuan@bytedance.com; : project lead
Preprint. Under review.

Figure 2: Standard autoregressive modeling (AR) vs. our proposed visual autoregressive modeling (VAR). (a) AR applied to language: sequential text token generation from left to right, word by word; (b) AR applied to images: sequential visual token generation in a raster-scan order, from left to right, top to bottom; (c) VAR for images: multi-scale token maps are autoregressively generated from coarse to fine scales (lower to higher resolutions), with parallel token generation within each scale. VAR requires a multi-scale VQVAE to work.

1 Introduction

The advent of GPT series [65, 66, 15, 62, 1] and more autoregressive (AR) large language models (LLMs) [22, 4, 38, 82, 83, 90, 78, 5, 79] has heralded a new epoch in the field of artificial intelligence. These models exhibit promising intelligence in generality and versatility that, despite issues like hallucinations [39], are still considered to take a solid step toward the general artificial intelligence (AGI). At the core of these models is a self-supervised learning strategy ­ predicting the next token in a sequence, a simple yet profound approach. Studies into the success of these large AR models have highlighted their scalability and generalizabilty: the former, as exemplified by scaling laws [43, 35], allows us to predict large model's performance from smaller ones and thus guides better resource allocation, while the latter, as evidenced by zero-shot and few-shot learning [66, 15], underscores the unsupervised-trained models' adaptability to diverse, unseen tasks. These properties reveal AR models' potential in learning from vast unlabeled data, encapsulating the essence of "AGI".

In parallel, the field of computer vision has been striving to develop large autoregressive or world models [58, 57, 6], aiming to emulate their impressive scalability and generalizability. Trailblazing efforts like VQGAN and DALL-E [30, 67] along with their successors [68, 92, 50, 99] have showcased the potential of AR models in image generation. These models utilize a visual tokenizer to discretize continuous images into grids of 2D tokens, which are then flattened to a 1D sequence for AR learning (Fig. 2 b), mirroring the process of sequential language modeling (Fig. 2 a). However, the scaling laws of these models remain underexplored, and more frustratingly, their performance significantly lags behind diffusion models [63, 3, 51], as shown in Fig. 3. In contrast to the remarkable achievements of LLMs, the power of autoregressive models in computer vision appears to be somewhat locked.

Autoregressive modeling requires defining the order of data. Our work reconsiders how to "order" an image: Humans typically perceive or create images in a hierachical manner, first capturing the global structure and then local details. This multi-scale, coarse-to-fine nature suggests an "order" for images. Also inspired by the widespread multi-scale designs [54, 52, 81, 44], we define autoregressive learning for images as "next-scale prediction" in Fig. 2 (c), diverging from the conventional "next-token prediction" in Fig. 2 (b). Our approach begins by encoding an image into multi-scale token maps. The autoregressive process is then started from the 1×1 token map, and progressively expands in resolution: at each step, the transformer predicts the next higher-resolution token map conditioned on all previous ones. We refer to this methodology as Visual AutoRegressive (VAR) modeling.

lower is better

0.3B 1B 2B 5B

AR (RQ)

MaskGIT

AR (vqgan)

Gigagan RCG

VAR (ours)

ADM DiT

Figure 3: Scaling behavior of different model families on ImageNet 256×256 generation benchmark. The FID of the validation set serves as a reference lower bound (1.78). VAR with 2B parameters reaches an FID of 1.73, surpassing L-DiT with 3B or 7B parameters.

2

