arXiv:2111.02358v2 [cs.CV] 27 May 2022

VLMO: Unified Vision-Language Pre-Training with Mixture-of-Modality-Experts
Hangbo Bao,Wenhui Wang,Li Dong, Qiang Liu Owais Khan Mohammed, Kriti Aggarwal, Subhojit Som, Furu Wei
Microsoft https://aka.ms/vlmo
Abstract
We present a unified Vision-Language pretrained Model (VLMO) that jointly learns a dual encoder and a fusion encoder with a modular Transformer network. Specifically, we introduce Mixture-of-Modality-Experts (MOME) Transformer, where each block contains a pool of modality-specific experts and a shared selfattention layer. Because of the modeling flexibility of MOME, pretrained VLMO can be fine-tuned as a fusion encoder for vision-language classification tasks, or used as a dual encoder for efficient image-text retrieval. Moreover, we propose a stagewise pre-training strategy, which effectively leverages large-scale image-only and text-only data besides image-text pairs. Experimental results show that VLMO achieves state-of-the-art results on various vision-language tasks, including VQA, NLVR2 and image-text retrieval. The code and pretrained models are available at https://aka.ms/vlmo.
1 Introduction
Vision-Language (VL) pre-training [30, 41, 35, 26, 20, 23] learns generic cross-modal representations from large-scale image-text pairs. Previous models usually employ image-text matching, image-text contrastive learning, masked region classification/feature regression, word-region/patch alignment and masked language modeling to aggregate and align visual and linguistic information. Then the pretrained models can be directly fine-tuned on downstream vision-language tasks, such as VL retrieval and classification (visual question answering, visual reasoning, etc.).
Two mainstream architectures are widely used in previous work. CLIP [35] and ALIGN [18] adopt a dual-encoder architecture to encode images and text separately. Modality interaction is handled by the cosine similarity of the image and text feature vectors. The dual-encoder architecture is effective for retrieval tasks, especially for masses of images and text. Feature vectors of images and text can be pre-computed and stored. However, the shallow interaction between images and text is not enough to handle complex VL classification tasks. ViLT [20] finds that CLIP gives a relatively low accuracy on visual reasoning task. Another line of work [30, 41, 43, 3, 20, 23] relies on a fusion encoder with cross-modal attention to model image-text pairs. Multi-layer Transformer [45] networks are usually employed to fuse image and text representations. The fusion-encoder architecture achieves superior performance on VL classification tasks. But it requires to jointly encode all possible image-text pairs to compute similarity scores for retrieval tasks. The quadratic time complexity leads to a much slower inference speed than the dual-encoder models whose time complexity is linear.
In order to take advantage of the two types of architectures, we propose a unified Vision-Language pretrained Model (VLMO) that can be used as either a dual encoder to separately encode images and text for retrieval tasks, or used as a fusion encoder to model the deep interaction of imagetext pairs for classification tasks. This is achieved by introducing Mixture-of-Modality-Experts
 Equal contribution.  Contact person.

(MOME) Transformer that can encode various modalities (images, text, and image-text pairs) within a Transformer block. MOME employs a pool of modality experts to replace the feed-forward network in standard Transformer. It captures modality-specific information by switching to different modality experts, and uses the shared self-attention across modalities to align visual and linguistic information. Specifically, MOME Transformer consists of three modality experts, namely vision expert for image encoding, language expert for text encoding, and vision-language expert for image-text fusion. Thanks to the modeling flexibility, we can reuse MOME Transformer with the shared parameters for different purposes, i.e., text-only encoder, image-only encoder, and image-text fusion encoder.
VLMO is jointly learned with three pre-training tasks, namely image-text contrastive learning, imagetext matching, and masked language modeling. In addition, we propose a stagewise pre-training strategy to effectively leverage large-scale image-only and text-only corpus besides image-text pairs in VLMO pre-training. We first pretrain vision experts and self-attention modules of MOME Transformer on image-only data using masked image modeling proposed in BEIT [2]. We then pretrain language experts on text-only data using masked language modeling [10]. Finally, the model is used to initialize vision-language pre-training. By getting rid of the limited size of image-text pairs and their simple and short captions, stagewise pre-training on large amounts of image-only and text-only data helps VLMO to learn more generalizable representations.
Experimental results demonstrate that VLMO achieves state-of-the-art results on vision-language retrieval and classification tasks. Our model, used as a dual encoder, outperforms fusion-encoderbased models [3, 14, 20, 23] while enjoying a much faster inference speed on retrieval tasks. Moreover, our model also achieves state-of-the-art results on visual question answering (VQA) and natural language for visual reasoning (NLVR2), where VLMO is used as a fusion encoder.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
· We propose a unified vision-language pretrained model VLMO that can be used as a fusion encoder for classification tasks, or fine-tuned as a dual encoder for retrieval tasks.
· We introduce a general-purpose multimodal Transformer for vision-language tasks, namely MOME Transformer, to encode different modalities. It captures modality-specific information by modality experts, and aligns contents of different modalities by the self-attention module shared across modalities.
· We show that stagewise pre-training using large amounts of image-only and text-only data greatly improves our vision-language pretrained model.
2 Related Work
Pre-training with Transformer [45] backbone networks has substantially advanced the state of the art across natural language processing [34, 10, 28, 22, 11, 36, 1, 7, 8, 4­6, 31], computer vision [12, 44, 2] and vision-language [43, 41, 3, 49, 35, 18, 20, 23] tasks.
The approaches of vision-language pre-training can be divided into two categories. The first category utilizes a dual encoder to encode images and text separately, and uses cosine similarity or a linear projection layer to model the interaction between images and text [35, 18]. Image-text contrastive learning is usually employed to optimize the model. Dual-encoder models are effective for visionlanguage retrieval tasks. However, the simple interaction is not enough to handle tasks that require complex reasoning, such as visual reasoning and visual question answering (VL classification tasks). The second category models the interaction of images and text using a deep fusion encoder with cross-modal attention [43, 30, 41, 24, 51, 3, 26, 25, 14, 49, 16, 17, 20, 23, 46]. Image-text matching, masked language modeling, word-region/patch alignment, masked region classification and feature regression are widely used to train fusion-encoder-based models. These models achieve better performance for vision-language classification tasks, while the joint encoding of all image-text pairs leads to a slow inference speed for retrieval tasks. A large portion of fusion-encoder-based models rely on an off-the-shelf object detector like Faster R-CNN [37] to obtain image region features. Generating region features slows down the inference speed and renders the approach less scalable. Recently, Pixel-BERT [16] removes object detector and encodes images into grid features by convolutional neural networks. ALBEF [23] employs image Transformer [12, 44] to obtain the representations of images, and uses text Transformer [10] to learn the contextualized representations of text. These representations are then fused by cross-modal attention. ViLT [20] encodes images into
2

